 GUIDE TO MODERN COOKERY.

_SOME PRESS OPINIONS._


“This is probably one of the most important cookery books issued
this century, and will, it may be presumed, eventually take its
place alongside the familiar culinary classics of former days. It is
especially interesting as marking the inauguration of an entirely new
style of living. M. Escoffier’s book is a culinary education in itself,
and should take rank as a standard, be studied by all housekeepers who
have either large households or gourmets to cater for, and should most
certainly be placed in the hands of all persons training for high-class
cookery teachers.”—_Queen._

“His book is comprehensive. It begins at the beginning and explains
the principles, so that a lady who reads it may talk learnedly to her
cook; it deals fully with all the old-established dishes of different
countries; but its main feature is the number of delightful novelties
which it introduces to notice. There are plenty of recipes which may be
applied with advantage in the middle-class household where the lady in
the kitchen has nobody under her, for M. Escoffier’s directions deal
alike with humble and elaborate preparations.”—_Outlook._

“It is a big book written by a great cook, and it will be useful
not only to accomplished cooks and experienced housekeepers, but
also to beginners in the kitchen and the housekeeper’s room, for
M. Escoffier takes nothing for granted and explains very patiently all
the groundwork of the art of cookery before he discussed the _haute
cuisine_. It contains much that is interesting to the _gourmet_ as well
as much that is useful to the cook, for he has little tales to tell
concerning some of the dishes; and now and again a scrap of history
crops up.”—_Tatler._

“Even as you take up the volume a sense of pleasurable anticipation
takes possession of you, so pleasing is the cover, so clear and bold
is the type, and so delightful to the touch is the paper on which is
printed the garnered wisdom of the famous _chef_. A little reading
will soon show you that it is as full of sound wisdom, and of fresh
and interesting information, as Brillat-Savarin’s “Physiologie du
Goût”.”—_The Westminster Gazette._

“The ordinary good plain British cook will discover something worth the
learning on every page; the worried mistresses of small establishments
will cherish the book as a treasure-house of new ideas; the man who
likes a good dinner but has no special knowledge of the art of the
kitchen will find the preface and the introductions to the chapters
capital reading; and every English-speaking gourmet will have a well
thumbed copy of this very modern “Guide” upon his book-shelf. The book
is a comprehensive one, and at the same time a simple one. It is a
book that should be in every house.”—_Pall Mall Gazette._




[Illustration: _A. Escoffier_]




                              A GUIDE TO
                            MODERN COOKERY


                                  BY
                             A. ESCOFFIER
                         OF THE CARLTON HOTEL


                            _WITH PORTRAIT_


                        NEW AND REVISED EDITION


                        [Logo: Windmill, 1920]
                       LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




_Printed in Great Britain._


        _First Printed, May 1907
     Second Impression, December 1907
  New and Revised Edition, January 1909
 New Impressions, August 1911, May 1913,
        March 1916, January 1920._


_Copyright 1907 by William Heinemann._




PREFACE


If the art of Cookery in all its branches were not undergoing a process
of evolution, and if its canons could be once and for ever fixed, as
are those of certain scientific operations and mathematical procedures,
the present work would have no _raison d’être_; inasmuch as there
already exist several excellent culinary text-books in the English
language. But everything is so unstable in these times of progress at
any cost, and social customs and methods of life alter so rapidly, that
a few years now suffice to change completely the face of usages which
at their inception bade fair to outlive the age—so enthusiastically
were they welcomed by the public.

In regard to the traditions of the festal board, it is but twenty
years ago since the ancestral English customs began to make way before
the newer methods, and we must look to the great impetus given to
travelling by steam traction and navigation, in order to account for
the gradual but unquestionable revolution.

In the wake of the demand came the supply. Palatial hotels were
built, sumptuous restaurants were opened, both of which offered their
customers luxuries undreamt of theretofore in such establishments.

Modern society contracted the habit of partaking of light suppers in
these places, after the theatres of the Metropolis had closed; and
the well-to-do began to flock to them on Sundays, in order to give
their servants the required weekly rest. And, since restaurants allow
of observing and of being observed, since they are eminently adapted
to the exhibiting of magnificent dresses, it was not long before they
entered into the life of Fortune’s favourites.

But these new-fangled habits had to be met by novel methods of
Cookery—better adapted to the particular environment in which they were
to be practised. The admirable productions popularised by the old
Masters of the Culinary Art of the preceding Century did not become
the light and more frivolous atmosphere of restaurants; were, in fact,
ill-suited to the brisk waiters, and their customers who only had eyes
for one another.

The pompous splendour of those bygone dinners, served in the majestic
dining-halls of Manors and Palaces, by liveried footmen, was part and
parcel of the etiquette of Courts and lordly mansions.

It is eminently suited to State dinners, which are in sooth veritable
ceremonies, possessing their ritual, traditions, and—one might even
say—their high priests; but it is a mere hindrance to the modern, rapid
service. The complicated and sometimes heavy menus would be unwelcome
to the hypercritical appetites so common nowadays; hence the need of a
radical change not only in the culinary preparations themselves, but in
the arrangements of the menus, and the service.

Circumstances ordained that I should be one of the movers in this
revolution, and that I should manage the kitchens of two establishments
which have done most to bring it about. I therefore venture to suppose
that a book containing a record of all the changes which have come into
being in kitchen work—changes whereof I am in a great part author—may
have some chance of a good reception at the hands of the public,
_i.e._, at the hands of those very members of it who have profited by
the changes I refer to.

For it was only with the view of meeting the many and persistent
demands for such a record that the present volume was written.

I had at first contemplated the possibility of including only new
recipes in this formulary. But it should be borne in mind that the
changes that have transformed kitchen procedure during the last
twenty-five years could not all be classed under the head of new
recipes; for, apart from the fundamental principles of the science,
which we owe to Carême, and which will last as long as Cooking itself,
scarcely one old-fashioned method has escaped the necessary new
moulding required by modern demands. For fear of giving my work an
incomplete appearance, therefore, I had to refer to these old-fashioned
practices and to include among my new recipes those of the former which
most deserved to survive. But it should not be forgotten that in a few
years, judging from the rate at which things are going, the publication
of a fresh selection of recipes may become necessary; I hope to live
long enough to see this accomplished, in order that I may follow the
evolution, started in my time, and add a few more original creations to
those I have already had the pleasure of seeing adopted; despite the
fact that the discovery of new dishes grows daily more difficult.

But novelty is the universal cry—novelty by hook or by crook! It is an
exceedingly common mania among people of inordinate wealth to exact
incessantly new or so-called new dishes. Sometimes the demand comes
from a host whose luxurious table has exhausted all the resources
of the modern cook’s repertory, and who, having partaken of every
delicacy, and often had too much of good things, anxiously seeks new
sensations for his _blasé_ palate. Anon, we have a hostess, anxious to
outshine friends with whom she has been invited to dine, and whom she
afterwards invites to dine with her.

Novelty! It is the prevailing cry; it is imperiously demanded by
everyone.

For all that, the number of alimentary substances is comparatively
small, the number of their combinations is not infinite, and the amount
of raw material placed either by art or by nature at the disposal of a
cook does not grow in proportion to the whims of the public.

What feats of ingenuity have we not been forced to perform, at times,
in order to meet our customers’ wishes? Those only who have had charge
of a large, modern kitchen can tell the tale. Personally, I have ceased
counting the nights spent in the attempt to discover new combinations,
when, completely broken with the fatigue of a heavy day, my body ought
to have been at rest.

Yet, the Chef who has had the felicity to succeed in turning out an
original and skilful preparation approved by his public and producing
a vogue, cannot, even for a time, claim the monopoly of his secret
discovery, or derive any profit therefrom. The painter, sculptor,
writer and musician are protected by law. So are inventors. But the
chef has absolutely no redress for plagiarism on his work; on the
contrary, the more the latter is liked and appreciated, the more
will people clamour for his recipes. Many hours of hard work perhaps
underlie his latest creation, if it have reached the desired degree of
perfection.

He may have forfeited his recreation and even his night’s rest, and
have laboured without a break over his combination; and, as a reward,
he finds himself compelled, morally at least, to convey the result
of his study to the first person who asks, and who, very often,
subsequently claims the invention of the recipe—to the detriment of the
real author’s chances and reputation.

This frantic love of novelty is also responsible for many of the
difficulties attending the arrangement of menus; for very few people
know what an arduous task the composing of a perfect menu represents.

The majority—even of those who are accustomed to receptions and the
giving of dinners—suppose that a certain routine alone is necessary,
together with some culinary practice, in order to write a menu; and few
imagine that a good deal more is needed than the mere inscription of
Courses upon a slip of pasteboard.

In reality the planning of these alimentary programmes is among the
most difficult problems of our art, and it is in this very matter that
perfection is so rarely reached. In the course of more than forty
years’ experience as a chef, I have been responsible for thousands
of menus, some of which have since become classical and have ranked
among the finest served in modern times; and I can safely say, that in
spite of the familiarity such a period of time ought to give one with
the work, the setting-up of a presentable menu is rarely accomplished
without lengthy labour and much thought, and for all that the result is
not always to my satisfaction. From this it may be seen how slender are
the claims of those who, without any knowledge of our art, and quite
unaware of the various properties belonging to the substances we use,
pretend to arrange a proper menu.

However difficult the elaboration of a menu may be, it is but the first
and by no means the only difficulty which results from the rapidity
with which meals are served nowadays. The number of dishes set before
the diners being considerably reduced, and the dishes themselves having
been deprived of all the advantages which their sumptuous decorations
formerly lent them, they must recover, by means of perfection and
delicacy, sufficient in the way of quality to compensate for their
diminished bulk and reduced splendour. They must be faultless in regard
to quality; they must be savoury and light. The choice of the raw
material, therefore, is a matter demanding vast experience on the part
of the chef; for the old French adage which says that “_La sauce fait
passer le poisson_” has long since ceased to be true, and if one do not
wish to court disapprobation—often well earned—the fish should not be
in the slightest degree inferior to its accompanying sauce.

While on the subject of raw material, I should like, _en passant_, to
call attention to a misguided policy which seems to be spreading in
private houses and even in some commercial establishments; I refer to
the custom which, arising as it doubtless does from a mistaken idea
of economy, consists of entrusting the choice of kitchen provisions
to people unacquainted with the profession, and who, never having
used the goods which they have to buy, are able to judge only very
superficially of their quality or real value, and cannot form any
estimate of their probable worth after the cooking process.

If economy were verily the result of such a policy none would object
to it. But the case is exactly the reverse; for, in the matter of
provisions, as in all commercial matters, the cheapest is the dearest
in the end. To obtain good results, good material in a sufficient
quantity must be used, and, in order to obtain good material, the
latter should be selected by the person who is going to use it, and who
knows its qualities and properties. Amphitryons who set aside these
essential principles may hope in vain to found a reputation for their
tables.

It will be seen that the greater part of the titles in this work have
been left in French. I introduced, or rather promulgated this system,
because, since it is growing every day more customary to write menus
in French, it will allow those who are unacquainted with the language
to accomplish the task with greater ease. Moreover, many of the
titles—especially those of recent creations—are quite untranslatable.
As the index, however, is in English, and in every case the order
number of each recipe accompanies the number of the page where it is to
be found, no confusion can possibly arise. I have also allowed certain
French technical terms, for which there exist no English equivalents,
to remain in their original form, and these will be found explained in
a glossary at the end of the book.

I preferred to do this rather than strain the meaning of certain
English words, in order to fit them to a slightly unusual application;
and in so doing I only followed a precedent which has been established
on a more or less large scale by such authors of English books on
French cooking as Francatelli, Gouffé, Ranhoffer, etc.

But the example for such verbal adoptions was set long ago in France,
where sporting and other terms, for which no suitable native words
could be found, were borrowed wholesale from the English language, and
gallicised. It is therefore not unreasonable to apply the principle
to terms in cookery which, though plentiful and varied in France, are
scarce in this country.

To facilitate the reading of the recipes, all words which are not in
common use, and of which the explanation will be found in the Glossary,
are italicised in the text.

In concluding this preface, which, I fear, has already overreached
the bounds I intended for it, I should like to thank those of my lady
clients as well as many English epicures whose kind appreciation has
been conducive to the writing of this work. I trust they will favour
the latter with the generous consideration of which they have so
frequently given the author valuable proofs, and for which he is glad
of an opportunity of expressing his deep gratitude.




                          CONTENTS

                           PART I
                    FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS

                          CHAPTER I                  PAGE
  FONDS DE CUISINE                                      1

                         CHAPTER II
  THE LEADING WARM SAUCES                              15

                         CHAPTER III
  THE SMALL COMPOUND SAUCES                            24

                         CHAPTER IV
  COLD SAUCES AND COMPOUND BUTTERS                     48

                          CHAPTER V
  SAVOURY JELLIES OR ASPICS                            59

                         CHAPTER VI
  THE COURT-BOUILLONS AND THE MARINADES                64

                         CHAPTER VII
  ELEMENTARY PREPARATIONS                              70

                        CHAPTER VIII
  THE VARIOUS GARNISHES FOR SOUPS                      87

                         CHAPTER IX
  GARNISHING PREPARATIONS FOR RELEVÉS AND ENTRÉES      92

                          CHAPTER X
  LEADING CULINARY OPERATIONS                          97


                           PART II
               RECIPES AND MODES OF PROCEDURE

                         CHAPTER XI                  PAGE
  HORS-D’ŒUVRES                                       137

                         CHAPTER XII
  EGGS                                                164

                        CHAPTER XIII
  SOUPS                                               197

                         CHAPTER XIV
  FISH                                                260

                         CHAPTER XV
  RELEVÉS AND ENTRÉES OF BUTCHER’S MEAT               352

                         CHAPTER XVI
  RELEVÉS AND ENTRÉES OF POULTRY AND GAME             473

                        CHAPTER XVII
  ROASTS AND SALADS                                   605

                        CHAPTER XVIII
  VEGETABLES AND FARINACEOUS PRODUCTS                 624

                         CHAPTER XIX
  SAVORIES                                            678

                         CHAPTER XX
  ENTREMETS (SWEETS)                                  687

                         CHAPTER XXI
  ICES AND SHERBETS                                   788

                        CHAPTER XXII
  DRINKS AND REFRESHMENTS                             816

                        CHAPTER XXIII
  FRUIT-STEWS AND JAMS                                820




GLOSSARY


  _Abats_, stands for such butcher’s supplies as heads, hearts, livers,
       kidneys, feet, &c.
  _Aiguillettes_, see No. 1755.
  _Ailerons_, see No. 1583.
  _Amourettes_, see No. 1288.
  _Anglaise_, to treat à l’Anglaise, see No. 174.
  _Anglaise_, to cook à l’Anglaise, means to cook plainly in water.
  _Anglaise_, a preparation of beaten eggs, oil and seasoning.
  _Attereaux_, see No. 1219.
  _Baba-moulds_, a kind of small deep cylindrical mould, slightly wider
       at the top than at the bottom.
  _Bain-Marie_, a hot-water bath in which utensils containing various
       culinary preparations are immersed to keep warm, or for the
       purpose of poaching or cooking.
  _Barquettes_, see No. 314.
  _Biscottes_, a kind of rusks.
  _Blanch_, _Blanched_, see No. 273.
  _Brandade_, see No. 1027.
  _Brunoise-fashion_, see _Cut_ below.
  _Canapés_, see No. 316.
  _Caramel Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Casserole_ (_En_), see No. 250.
  _Cassolette_, a kind of hot hors-d’œuvre, moulded to the shape of a
       small drum.
  _Cèpes_, a kind of mushroom (Boletus edulis).
  _Chartreuse-fashion_, see No. 1220.
  _Chiffonade_, see No. 215.
  _Chinois_, a very small green candied orange.
  _Chipolata_, a kind of small sausages.
  _Choux_, a kind of cake made from Pâte à Choux, q.v.
  _Cisel_, _Ciseled_, to cut a vegetable after the manner of a
       chaff-cutting machine.
  _Clothe_, _Clothed_, _Clothing_ (of moulds), see No. 916.
  _Cocotte_ (_En_), see No. 250.
  _Concass_, _Concassed_, to chop roughly.
  _Contise_, to incise a piece of meat at stated intervals, and to
       insert slices of truffle, or other substance, into each incision.
  _Crépinettes_, see No. 1410.
  _Croustade_, see No. 2393.
  _Croûtons_, pieces of bread of various shapes and sizes, fried in
       butter. In the case of aspic jelly, croûtons stand for variously
       shaped pieces used in bordering dishes.
  _Cut_, Brunoise-fashion = to cut a product into small dice.
  _Cut_, Julienne-fashion = to cut a product into match-shaped rods.
  _Cut_, Paysanne-fashion = to cut a product into triangles.
  _Dariole-moulds_, small Baba-moulds, q.v.
  _Darne_, see No. 784.
  _Daubière_, an earthenware utensil used in the cooking of Daubes.
  _Écarlate_ (_A l’_), salted meat is said to be à l’écarlate when it is
       swathed in a coat of scarlet jelly.
  _Escarole_, Batavia chicory.
  _Feuilletés_, a kind of puffs made from puff-paste.
  _Flute_ (French, soup), a long crisp roll of bread.
  _Fondue_, (1) a cheese preparation; (2) a pulpy state to which such
       vegetables as tomatoes, sorrel, &c., are reduced by cooking.
  _Fumet_, a kind of essence extracted from fish, game, &c.
  _Galette_, a large quoit, made from puff-paste or short-paste, &c.
  _Gaufrette_, a special wafer.
  _Génoise_, see No. 2376.
  _Gild_, _Gilding_, _Gilded_ (1) to cover an object with beaten eggs,
       by means of a brush; (2) to give a golden sheen to objects by
       means of heat.
  _Gratin_, _Gratined_, see No. 268 to 272 inclusive.
  _Hatelet_, an ornamental skewer; the word sometimes stands for
       Attereaux.
  _Julienne_, Julienne-fashion, see _Cut_.
  _Langoustine_, a small variety of the Spiny Lobster.
  _Large-Ball Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Large-Crack Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Large-Thread Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Macédoine_, a mixture of early-season vegetables or fruit.
  _Madeleine-mould_, a mould in the shape of a narrow scallop-shell.
  _Manied_ (said of butter), see No. 151.
  _Marinade_, see No. 168.
  _Meringue_, see No. 2382. _Meringued_ = coated with meringue.
  _Mirepoix_, see No. 228.
  _Mise-en-place_, a general name given to those elementary preparations
       which are constantly resorted to during the various stages of
       most culinary operations.
  _Morue_, Newfoundland or Iceland salt-cod.
  _Mousses_, a class of light, hot or cold preparations of fish, meat,
       poultry, game, etc., and sweets, moulded in large moulds in
       sufficient quantities for several people.
  _Mousselines_, same as above, but moulded in small quantities at a
       time, enough for one person.
  _Mousserons_, a kind of mushroom.
  _Nappe Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Orgeat_, a beverage made from syrup and almonds.
  _Oxalis_, a Mexican vegetable, allied to sorrel, of which the roots
       principally are eaten.
  _Paillettes au Parmesan_, see No. 2322.
  _Palmettes_, palm-shaped pieces of puff-paste, used in decorating.
  _Panés à l’Anglaise_, treated à l’Anglaise, see _Anglaise_.
  _Pannequets_, see No. 2403.
  _Papillote_, see No. 1259.
  _Pâte à Choux_, see No. 2373.
  _Paupiette_, a strip of chicken, of fish fillet, or other meat,
       garnished with forcemeat, rolled to resemble a scroll and cooked.
  _Paysanne-fashion_, see _Cut_.
  _Pluches_, the shreds of chervil, used for soups.
  _Poële_, _Poëling_, see No. 250.
  _Poêle_ (_A la_), see No. 395.
  _Pralin_, see No. 2352.
  _Pralined_, having been treated with Pralin, q.v.
  _Printanier_ (Eng. Vernal), a name given to a garnish of early-season
       vegetables, cut to various shapes.
  _Profiterolles_, see No. 218.
  _Râble_, the back of a hare.
  _Ravioli_, see No. 2296.
  _Ribbon Stage_, see No. 2376.
  _Rissole_, to fry brown.
  _Salpicon_, a compound of various products, cut into dice, and,
       generally, cohered with sauce or forcemeat.
  _Sauté_, _Sautéd_, a process of cooking described under No. 251.
  _Sauté_, a qualifying term applied to dishes treated in the way
       described under No. 251.
  _Savarin-mould_, an even, crown-shaped mould.
  _Small-Ball Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Small-Crack Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Small-Thread Stage_, see _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_, below.
  _Soufflé_, name given to a class of light, hot or cold preparations of
       fish, meat, poultry, game, etc., and sweets, to which the whites
       of eggs are usually added if the preparation is served hot, and
       to which whisked cream is added if the preparation is served
       cold.
  _Soup-Flute_, see _Flute_.
  _Stages in the Cooking of Sugar_:—
       Small-Thread }
       Large-Thread }
       Small-Ball   }
       Large-Ball   } See No. 2344.
       Small-Crack  }
       Large-Crack  }
       Caramel      }
       Nappe, see No. 2955.
  _Subrics_, see No. 2137.
  _Suprême_, a name given to the fillet of the breast of a fowl. The
       term has been extended to certain of the best parts of fish,
       game, etc.
  _Terrine_, a patty.
  _Terrine à Pâté_, a special utensil in which patties are cooked.
  _Tomatéd._ Preparations are said to be tomatéd when they are mixed
       with enough tomato purée for the shade and flavour of the latter
       to be distinctly perceptible in them.
  _Vesiga_, the dried spine-marrow of the sturgeon.
  _Zest_, the outermost, coloured, glossy film of the rind of an orange
       or lemon.




PART I

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS OF COOKING




CHAPTER I

FONDS DE CUISINE


Before undertaking the description of the different kinds of dishes
whose recipes I purpose giving in this work, it will be necessary to
reveal the groundwork whereon these recipes are built. And, although
this has already been done again and again, and is wearisome in the
extreme, a text-book on cooking that did not include it would be not
only incomplete, but in many cases incomprehensible.

Notwithstanding the fact that it is the usual procedure, in culinary
matters, to insist upon the importance of the part played by stock, I
feel compelled to refer to it at the outset of this work, and to lay
even further stress upon what has already been written on the subject.

Indeed, stock is everything in cooking, at least in French cooking.
Without it, nothing can be done. If one’s stock is good, what remains
of the work is easy; if, on the other hand, it is bad or merely
mediocre, it is quite hopeless to expect anything approaching a
satisfactory result.

The workman mindful of success, therefore, will naturally direct his
attention to the faultless preparation of his stock, and, in order
to achieve this result, he will find it necessary not merely to make
use of the freshest and finest goods, but also to exercise the most
scrupulous care in their preparation, for, in cooking, care is half
the battle. Unfortunately, no theories, no formulæ, and no recipes,
however well written, can take the place of practical experience in the
acquisition of a full knowledge concerning this part of the work—the
most important, the most essential, and certainly the most difficult
part.

In the matter of stock it is, above all, necessary to have a sufficient
quantity of the finest materials at one’s disposal. The master or
mistress of a house who stints in this respect thereby deliberately
forfeits his or her right to make any remark whatsoever to the _chef_
concerning his work, for, let the talent or merits of the latter be
what they may, they are crippled by insufficient or inferior material.
It is just as absurd to exact excellent cooking from a _chef_ whom one
provides with defective or scanty goods, as to hope to obtain wine from
a bottled decoction of logwood.


=The Principal Kinds of Fonds de Cuisine (Foundation Sauces and Stocks)=

The principal kinds of fonds de cuisine are:—

  1. Ordinary and clarified consommés.
  2. The brown stock or “_estouffade_,” game stocks, the bases of
     thickened gravies and of brown sauces.
  3. White stock, basis of white sauces.
  4. Fish stock.
  5. The various essences of poultry, game, fish, &c., the complements
     of small sauces.
  6. The various glazes: meat, game, and poultry.
  7. The basic sauces: Espagnole, Velouté, Béchamel, Tomato, and
     Hollandaise.
  8. The savoury jellies or aspics of old-fashioned cooking.

To these kinds of stock, which, in short, represent the buttresses of
the culinary edifice, must now be added the following preparations,
which are, in a measure, the auxiliaries of the above:—

  1. The roux, the cohering element in sauces.
  2. The “Mirepoix” and “Matignon” aromatic and flavouring elements.
  3. The “_Court-Bouillon_” and the “_Blancs_.”
  4. The various stuffings.
  5. The _marinades_.
  6. The various garnishes for soups, for relevés, for entrées, &c.
     (“Duxelle,” “Duchesse,” “Dauphine,” _Pâte à choux_, frying
     batters, various _Salpicons_, Profiterolles, Royales, Œufs filés,
     Diablotins, Pastes, &c.).


1—ORDINARY OR WHITE CONSOMMÉ

_Quantities for making Four Quarts._

  3 lbs. of shin of beef.
  3 lbs. of lean beef.
  1½ lbs. of fowls’ carcases.
  1 lb. of carrots.
  ½ lb. of turnips.
  ¾ lb. of leeks and 1 stick of celery.
  ¼ lb. of parsnips.
  1 medium-sized onion with a clove stuck in it.

_Preparation._—Put the meat into a stock-pot of suitable dimensions,
after having previously strung it together; add the poultry carcase,
five quarts of water, and one-half oz. of grey salt. Place the
stock-pot on a moderate fire in such a manner that it may not boil too
quickly, and remember to stir the meat from time to time. Under the
influence of the heat, the water gradually reaches the interior of
the meat, where, after having dissolved the liquid portions, it duly
combines with them. These liquid portions contain a large proportion
of albumen, and as the temperature of the water rises this substance
has a tendency to coagulate. It also increases in volume, and, by
virtue of its lightness, escapes from the water and accumulates on the
surface in the form of scum. Carefully remove this scum as it forms,
and occasionally add a little cold water before the boil is reached in
order that, the latter being retarded, a complete expulsion of the scum
may be effected. The clearness of the consommé largely depends upon the
manner in which this skimming has been carried out. Then the vegetable
garnishing is added. The scum from these is removed as in the previous
case, and the edge of the stock-pot should be carefully wiped to the
level of the fluid, so as to free it from the deposit which has been
formed there. The stock-pot is then moved to a corner of the fire where
it may continue cooking slowly for four or five hours. At the end of
this time it should be taken right away from the fire, and, after half
a pint of cold water has been added to its contents, it should be left
to rest a few minutes with a view to allowing the grease to accumulate
on the surface of the liquid, whence it must be carefully removed
before the consommé is strained. This last operation is effected by
means of a very fine strainer, placed on the top of a white tureen
(clean and wide), which should then be placed in a draught to hasten
the cooling of the consommé. The tureen should not on any account be
covered, and this more particularly in summer, when rapid cooling is a
precautionary measure against fermentation.


=Remarks upon the Different Causes which Combine to Influence the
Quality of a Consommé=

It will be seen that I have not made any mention in the above formula
of the meat and the vegetables which have helped to make the consommé,
my reason being that it is preferable to remove them from the stock-pot
only after the broth has been strained, so as not to run the risk of
disturbing the latter.

The quality of the meat goes a long way towards settling the quality of
the consommé. In order that the latter be perfect, it is essential that
the meat used should be that of comparatively old animals whose flesh
is well set and rich in flavour. This is a _sine quâ non_, and the lack
of meat coming from old animals in England accounts for the difficulty
attaching to the making of a good consommé and savoury sauces in this
country. Cattle in England are killed at an age varying from three to
four years at the most; the meat thus obtained has no equal for the
purpose of roasts and grills, and anything approaching it is rarely
met with on the Continent. But when this same meat is used for boiling
or braising, it does not contain enough juice or flavour to yield a
satisfactory result.

This shortcoming is furthermore aggravated by a fault that many commit
who are employed in the making of consommés and stock. The fault in
question consists in cooking the bones simultaneously with the meat.
Now to extract that gelatinous element from bone which produces the
mellowness characteristic of all good consommés, it is necessary that
the gelatigenous bodies should be cooked for twelve hours at least, and
even after that time has elapsed they are still not entirely spent.
On the Continent the quality of the meat easily compensates for this
technical error, but such is certainly not the case in England, where
five hours’ stewing only results in a flat and insipid consommé.

I therefore believe that, in the case of either consommé or stock, the
formulæ of which I shall give later, it would be advisable for the
bones to stew at least twelve hours, and this only after they have
been well broken up, while the quantity of water used should be so
calculated as to suffice exactly for the immersion of the meat that
must follow. The contents of this first stock-pot should include half
of the vegetables mentioned, and the consommé thus obtained, after
having been strained and cooled, will take the place of the water in
the recipe, in accordance with the directions I have given above.


=The Uses of White Consommé=

White consommé is used in the preparation of clarified consommés, in
which case it undergoes a process of clarifying, the directions for
which will be given later. It also serves as the liquor for thick
soups, poached fowls, &c. It must be limpid, as colourless as possible,
and very slightly salted, for, whatever the use may be for which it is
intended, it has to undergo a process of concentration.


2—THE PREPARATION OF CLARIFIED CONSOMMÉ FOR CLEAR SOUPS

_Quantities for making four quarts._—Five quarts of ordinary consommé,
one and one-half lbs. of very lean beef, the white of an egg, one
fowl’s carcase (roasted if possible). First, mince the beef and pound
it in a mortar with the fowl’s carcase and the white of egg, adding
a little cold white consommé. Put the whole into a tall, narrow, and
thick-bottomed stewpan; then gradually add the cold, white broth, from
which all grease has been removed, that the whole may be well mixed.
Then the stewpan may be put on the fire, and its contents thoroughly
stirred, for fear of their burning at the bottom. When boiling-point
is reached, move the stewpan to a corner of the fire, so that the
soup may only simmer, for anything approaching the boil would disturb
the contents. A good hour should be enough to properly finish the
consommé, and any longer time on the fire would be rather prejudicial
than the reverse, as it would probably impair the flavour of the
preparation. Now carefully remove what little grease may have collected
on the surface of the consommé, and strain the latter through muslin
into another clean stewpan. It is now ready for the addition of the
garnishes that are to form part of it, which I shall enumerate in due
course.


=Remarks upon Clarifications=

For clarified consommés, even more than for the ordinary kind, it
is eminently advisable that the meat should be that of old animals.
Indeed, it is safe to say that one lb. of meat coming from an animal of
eight years will yield much better consommé than two lbs. would, coming
from a fattened animal of about three or four years. The consommé will
be stronger, mellower, and certainly more tasty, as the flesh of young
animals has absolutely no richness of flavour.

It will be seen that I do not refer to any vegetable for the
clarification. If the white consommé has been well carried out, it
should be able to dispense with all supplementary flavouring, and,
the customary error of cooks being rather to overdo the quantity of
vegetables—even to the extent of disguising the natural aroma of
the consommé—I preferred to entirely abandon the idea of vegetable
garnishes in clarifications, and thus avoid a common stumbling-block.


3—CHICKEN CONSOMMÉ

White chicken consommé is prepared in exactly the same way as ordinary
white consommé. There need only be added to the meat, the quantity of
which may be lessened, an old hen or a cock, slightly coloured on the
spit or in the oven.

For the clarification, the quantity of roast fowl-carcases used may be
increased, provided the latter be not too fat. The process, however, is
the same as in the clarification of ordinary consommés.

The colour of chicken consommé should be lighter than that of the
ordinary kind—namely, a light, amber yellow, limpid and warm.


4—FISH CONSOMMÉ

These consommés are rarely used, for Lenten soups with a fish basis are
generally thick soups, for the preparation of which the fish _fumet_
whereof I shall give the formula later (Formula No. 11) should avail.
Whenever there is no definite reason for the use of an absolutely
Lenten consommé, it would be advisable to resort to one of the ordinary
kind, and to finish off the same by means of a good fish essence
extracted from the bones of a sole or whiting. An excellent consommé
is thus obtained, more palatable and less flat than the plain fish
consommé.

If, however, one were obliged to make a plain fish consommé, the
following procedure should be adopted:—


=Clarification of Fish Consommé=

_Quantities for making Four Quarts._—Four and one-half quarts of
ordinary fish _fumet_ having a decided taste; one-half lb. of good
fresh caviare, or pressed caviare.

_Mode of Procedure._—Pound the caviare and mix the resulting pulp with
the cold fish _fumet_. Put the whole into a saucepan, place it on the
open fire, and stir with a spatula until the contents reach the boil.
Then move the saucepan to a corner of the fire, and let the consommé
simmer gently for twenty minutes, after which strain it through muslin
with great caution, and keep it well covered and in the warmth, so as
to prevent the formation of a gelatinous film on the surface.

Fish consommés are greatly improved by the addition of such aromatics
as saffron or curry, both of which considerably add to their quality.


5—GAME CONSOMMÉ

The necks, breasts, and shoulders of venison and of hare, old wild
rabbits, old pheasants, and old partridges may be used in the
production of game consommés. An ordinary consommé may likewise be
made, in which half the beef can be replaced by veal, and to which may
be added, while clarifying, a succulent game essence. This last method
is even preferable when dealing with feathered game, but in either case
it is essential that the meat used should be half-roasted beforehand,
in order to strengthen the _fumet_.

The formula that I give below must therefore only be looked upon as
a model, necessarily alterable according to the resources at one’s
disposal, the circumstances, and the end in view.

_Quantities for making Four Quarts of Plain Game Consommé._

  3 lbs. of neck, shoulder, or breast of venison.
  1½ lbs. of hare-trimmings.
  1 old pheasant or 2 partridges.
  4 oz. of sliced carrots, browned in butter.
  ½ lb. of mushrooms, likewise browned in butter.
  1 medium-sized leek and 2 sticks of celery.
  1 bunch of herbs with extra thyme and bay leaves.
  1 onion, oven-browned, with 2 cloves stuck into it.

_Liquor._—Five and one-half quarts of water.

_Seasoning._—One oz. of salt and a few peppercorns, these to be added
ten minutes previous to straining the consommé.

_Time allowed for cooking._—Three hours.

_Mode of Procedure._—Proceed in exactly the same way as for ordinary
consommés, taking care only to half-roast the meat, as I pointed out
above, before putting it in the stewpan.


=The Clarification of Game Consommés=

The constituents of the clarification of game consommés vary according
to the kind of consommé desired. If it is to have a partridge flavour,
one partridge should be allowed for each quart of the consommé, whereas
if its flavour is to be that of the pheasant, half an old pheasant will
be required per each quart of the liquid. Lastly, in the case of plain
game consommés, one lb. of lean venison, hare, or wild rabbit should be
allowed for each quart of the required consommé.

_Mode of Procedure._—Whatever be the kind of game used, the latter must
be thoroughly boned and the meat well pounded, together with the white
of an egg per four quarts of consommé. About two oz. per quart of dried
mushrooms should now be added if they can be procured, while the bones
and the remains or carcases of game should be browned in the oven and
completely drained of all grease. The whole can now be mixed with the
cold game consommé. The clarification is then put over an open fire
(stirring incessantly the while), and as soon as the boil is reached
the saucepan must be moved to a corner of the fire, where its contents
may gently boil for three-quarters of an hour. The fat should then be
removed, and the consommé strained through muslin, after which cover up
until wanted.


6—SPECIAL CONSOMMÉS FOR SUPPERS

The consommés whose formulæ I have just given are intended more
particularly for dinners. They are always finished off by some kind of
garnish, which, besides lending them an additional touch of flavour,
gives them their special and definite character when they are served up
in the diner’s plate.

But the case is otherwise with the consommés served for suppers. These,
being only served in cups, either hot or cold, do not allow of any
garnishing, since they are to be _drunk_ at table. They must therefore
be perfect in themselves, delicate, and quite clear.

These special consommés are made in a similar manner to the others,
though it is needful to slightly increase the quantity of meat used
for the clarification, and to add to that clarification the particular
flavour mentioned on the _menu_—to wit, a few stalks of celery, if the
consommé is a celery one; a small quantity of curry, if the consommé is
given as “à l’Indienne”; or a few old roast partridges if it is to be
termed “Consommé au fumet de perdreau”; and so on.

The means by which one may vary the aroma of consommés are legion, but
it is highly important, what aroma soever be used, that the latter be
not too pronounced. It ought only to lend a distinctive and, at the
same time, subtle finish to the consommé, which, besides sharpening the
latter, should increase its succulence.

When the consommé is served cold it ought to have the qualities of an
extremely light and easily-melting jelly, barely firm; but when it is
too liquid, it rarely gives that sensation of perfection and succulence
to the palate of the consumer which the latter expects. When too firm
and too gelatinous it is positively disagreeable; therefore, if it is
to be relished, it should be just right in respect of consistency.


7—BROWN STOCK OR “ESTOUFFADE”

_Quantities for making Four Quarts._

  4 lbs. of shin of beef (flesh and bone).
  4 lbs. of shin of veal (flesh and bone).
  ½ lb. of lean, raw ham.
  ½ lb. of fresh pork rind, rinsed in tepid water.
  ¾ lb. of minced carrots, browned in butter.
  ¾ lb. of minced onions, browned in butter.
  1 faggot, containing a little parsley, a stick of celery, a small
    sprig of thyme, and a bay leaf.

_Preparation._—Bone and string the meat, and keep it in readiness for
the morrow. Break the bones as finely as possible, and, after having
besprinkled them with a little stock-fat, brown them in an oven; also
stir them repeatedly. When they are slightly browned, put them in a
conveniently large saucepan with the carrots, the onions, and the
faggot. Add five quarts of cold water, and put the saucepan on an open
fire to boil. As soon as the boil is reached skim carefully; wipe the
edge of the saucepan; put the lid half on, and allow the stock to cook
gently for twelve hours; then roughly remove the fat; pass the liquid
through a sieve, and let it cool.

This being done, put the meat in a saucepan just large enough to hold
it. Brown it a little in some stock-fat, and clear it entirely of the
latter. Add half a pint of the prepared stock, cover the saucepan,
and let the meat simmer on the side of the fire until the stock is
almost entirely reduced. Meanwhile the meat should have been repeatedly
turned, that it may be equally affected throughout. Now pour the
remainder of the stock, prepared from bones, into the saucepan, bring
the whole to the boil, and then move the saucepan to a corner of the
fire for the boiling to continue very slowly and regularly with the lid
off. As soon as the meat is well cooked the fat should be removed from
the stock, and the latter should be strained or rubbed through a sieve,
after which it should be put aside to be used when required.

_Remarks Relative to the Making of Brown Stock._—Instead of stringing
the meat after having boned it, if time presses, it may be cut into
large cubes before browning. In this case one hour and a half would
suffice to cook it and to extract all its juice.

Whether brown or white, stock should never be salted, because it is
never served in its original state. It is either reduced in order to
make glazes or sauces—in which case the concentration answers the
purpose of seasoning—or else it is used to cook meat which must be
salted before being cooked, and which, therefore, imparts the necessary
salt to its surrounding liquor.

Brown stock ought to be the colour of fine burnt amber, and it must be
transparent. It is used in making meat-glazes after reduction, also to
moisten meat for braising and to prepare brown sauces.


8—BROWN GAME STOCK

There is no difference between the game consommés and game stock, or,
otherwise stated, ordinary game consommé and brown game stock are one
and the same thing. The distinction lies in the ultimate use of this
preparation; it is clarified, as we have shown (Formula 5), if it be
intended for a clear soup, and it is used in its original state if it
is to be used for a thick game soup, for a sauce, or for reducing.


9—BROWN VEAL STOCK

Brown veal stock requires the same quantities of shin and trimmings of
veal as white veal stock (Formula 10). The time allowed for cooking is,
however, a little shorter, and this operation may be completed within
eight hours. This stock is mostly used as the liquor for poultry and
poëled game, while it may also serve in the preparation of thickened
veal stock. Being quite neutral in taste, it lends itself to all
purposes, and readily takes up the aroma of the meat with which it
may happen to be combined. It is admirably suited to the poaching of
quails, and nothing can supplant it in this particular.


10—WHITE VEAL STOCK, AND POULTRY STOCK

_Quantities for making Four Quarts._

  8 lbs. of shin of veal, or lean and fresh veal trimmings.
  1 or 2 fowls’ carcases, raw if they are handy.
  12 oz. of carrots.
  6 oz. of onions stuck with a clove.
  5½ quarts of cold water.
  4 oz. of leeks strung with a stick of celery.
  1 faggot, including 1 oz. of parsley, 1 bay leaf, and a small sprig
    of thyme.

_Preparation._—Bone the shins, string the meat, break up the bones as
small as possible, and put them in a stewpan with the water. Place on
an open fire, allow to boil, skim carefully, and then move to a side of
the fire to cook very gently for five hours. At the end of this time
put the stock into another stewpan, add the meat and the vegetables,
add water, if necessary, to keep the quantity of liquid at five quarts,
let it boil, and allow it to cook slowly for another three hours, after
which remove all grease from the stock, pass the latter through a fine
strainer or a colander, and put it aside until wanted.

_Remarks upon White Stock._—One should contrive to make this stock
as gelatinous as possible. It is therefore an indispensable measure
that the bones be well broken up and cooked for at least eight hours.
Veal never yields such clear stock as beef; nevertheless, the consommé
obtained from veal should not be turbid. It must, on the contrary, be
kept as clear and as white as possible.

_Poultry Stock_ is made by adding two old fowls to the above veal
stock, and these should be put into the liquor with the meat.


=Fish Stock=


11—WHITE FISH STOCK

_Quantities for making Four Quarts._

  4 lbs. of trimmings and bones of sole or whiting.
  ½ lb. of sliced, blanched onions.
  2 oz. of parsley, root or stalks.
  ½ bottle of white wine.

_Preparation._—Butter the bottom of a thick, tall stewpan, put in the
blanched onions and the parsley-stalks, and upon these aromatics lay
the fish remains. Add the juice of a lemon, cover the stewpan, put it
on the fire, and allow the fish to exude its essence, jerking the pan
at intervals. Moisten, in the first place, with the white wine; then,
with the lid off, reduce the liquid to about half. Now add four quarts
of cold water, bring to the boil, skim, and then leave to cook for
twenty minutes, only, on a moderate fire. The time allowed is ample
for the purpose of extracting the aromatic and gelatinous properties
contained in the bones, and a more protracted stewing would only impair
the savour of the stock.

_Remarks upon White Fish Stock._—The formula which I give above
diverges considerably from that commonly used, for, as a rule, fish
stock is diluted far too much, and is stewed for much too long a
time. I have observed that fish stock may be greatly improved by
rapid cooking, and it was this consideration that led me to dilute it
scantily, so as to avoid prolonged reduction.

It is likewise necessary to remember that in order to make perfect fish
stock, only the sole or whiting should be used. In a case of emergency,
however, _i.e._, if the supply of the latter were to run short, a
quarter of their weight of brill bones might be added to them. But all
other kinds of fish should be avoided in the preparation.


12—FISH STOCK WITH RED WINE

This stock is comparatively rarely used, because, in practice, it is
naturally obtained in the cooking of the fish itself, as, for instance,
in the case of the “Matelotes.” Be this as it may, with the recent
incursion of a custom which seems to demand, ever more and more, the
serving of fish without bones, the following formula will be worthy of
interest, as it is likely that its need will henceforth be felt with
increasing urgency.

Fish _fumet_ with red wine may be prepared from all fresh-water fish,
as well as from the remains of sole, whiting, chicken-turbot, and
brill. It is generally better, however, to have recourse to the bones
and remains of that fish which happens to be constituting the dish—that
is to say, the bones and trimmings of sole in a stock for fillet of
sole, the bones and trimmings of a chicken-turbot in a _fumet_ for a
chicken-turbot, and so on. The preparatory formula remains the same,
whatever the kind of fish used may be.

_Quantities for making Four Quarts of_ Fumet _with Red Wine_.—Four lbs.
of bones, heads, and trimmings of the fish to be served;
three-quarters lb. of minced white onions; three oz. of parsley stalks,
two bay leaves, four small sprigs of thyme, and four cloves of garlic;
two bottles of red wine and four pints of water.

_Mode of Procedure._—Put all the above-mentioned ingredients in a thick
and tall stewpan, boil, skim carefully, and allow to cook twenty to
thirty minutes on a moderate fire; then strain the stock through a
colander into a tureen, to be used when required.

_Remarks upon Fish Stock with Red Wine._—This stock stands reduction
far better than white fish stock. Nevertheless, I urge the advisability
of trying to obtain the required quantity without reduction. In its
preparation, one may use some mushroom parings, as in the case of white
stock, if these are handy, and they will be found to lend an agreeable
flavour to the fish _fumet_.


13—VARIOUS ESSENCES

As their name implies, essences are stock which hold a large proportion
of a substance’s aroma in a concentrated form. They are, in fact,
ordinary stock, only less diluted, with the idea of intensifying the
flavour of the treated ingredients; hence their utility is _nil_ if
the stock which they are intended to finish has been reasonably and
judiciously treated. It is infinitely simpler to make savoury and
succulent stock in the first place than to produce a mediocre stock,
and finally complete it by a specially prepared essence. The result in
the first instance is better, and there is economy of time and material.

The most one can do is to recommend, in certain circumstances, the use
of essences extracted from particularly well-flavoured products, as,
for instance, mushrooms, truffles, morels, and celery. But it would be
well to remember that, nine times out of ten, it is preferable to add
the product itself to the stock during the preparation of the same than
to prepare essences.

For this reason I do not think it necessary to dilate upon the subject
of essences, the need of which should not be felt in good cooking.


14—VARIOUS GLAZES

The various glazes of meat, fowl, game, and fish are merely stock
reduced to the point of viscosity. Their uses are legion. Occasionally
they serve in decking dishes with a brilliant and unctuous coating
which makes them sightly; at other times they may help to strengthen
the consistence of a sauce or other culinary preparation, while again
they may be used as sauces proper after they have been correctly
creamed or buttered.

Glazes are distinguished from essences by the fact that the latter
are only prepared with the object of extracting all the flavour
of the product under treatment, whereas the former are, on the
contrary, constituted by the whole base of the substance itself.
They therefore have not only its savour, but also its succulence and
mellowness, whereby they are superior to the essences, and cooking can
but be improved by substituting them for the latter. Nevertheless,
many _chefs_ of the old school do not permit the use of glazes in
culinary preparations, or, rather, they are of opinion that each
cooking operation should produce them on its own account, and thus be
sufficient unto itself. Certainly, the theory is correct when neither
time nor cost is limited. But nowadays the establishments are scarce
where these theories may be applied, and, indeed, if one does not make
an abuse of glazes, and if they be prepared with care, their use gives
excellent results, while they lend themselves admirably to the very
complex demands of modern customs.


15—MEAT GLAZE

Meat glaze is made by reducing brown stock (Formula 7) in a large
stewpan upon an open fire. As often as the stock is appreciably
reduced, during ebullition, it may be transferred to smaller stewpans,
taking care to strain it through muslin at each change of stewpan. The
glaze may be considered sufficiently reduced when it evenly veneers
a withdrawn spoon. The fire used for reducing should gradually wane
as the concentration progresses, and the last phase must be effected
slowly and on a moderate fire.

When it is necessary to obtain a lighter and clearer glaze, the
brown veal stock (Formula No. 9) should be reduced instead of the
“_Estouffade_.”


16—POULTRY GLAZE

Reduce the poultry base indicated in Formula 10, and proceed in
exactly the same way as for meat glaze (Formula 15).


17—GAME GLAZE

Use the game base (Formula 8), and proceed as for meat glaze (Formula
15).


18—FISH GLAZE

This glaze is used less often than the preceding ones. As it is only
used to intensify the savour of sauces, it is sufficient for this
purpose to prepare a white fish stock (Formula 11), which may be
diluted with the stock already prepared, and which may be reduced
according to the requirements. The name of fish _fumet_ or fish essence
is given to this preparation; its flavour is more delicate than that of
fish glaze, which it replaces with advantage.




CHAPTER II

THE LEADING WARM SAUCES


Warm sauces are of two kinds: the leading sauces, also called “mother
sauces,” and the small sauces, which are usually derived from the
first-named, and are generally only modified forms thereof. Cooking
stock only includes the leading sauces, but I shall refer to the small
hot sauces and the cold sauces at the end of the auxiliary stock.

Experience, which plays such an important part in culinary work,
is nowhere so necessary as in the preparation of sauces, for not
only must the latter flatter the palate, but they must also vary in
savour, consistence and viscosity, in accordance with the dishes they
accompany. By this means, in a well-ordered dinner, each dish differs
from the preceding ones and from those that follow.

Furthermore, sauces must, through the perfection of their preparation,
obey the general laws of a rational hygiene, wherefore they should be
served and combined in such wise as to allow of easy digestion by the
frequently disordered stomachs of their consumers.

Carême was quite justified in pluming himself upon the fact that during
his stay at the English Court his master—the Prince Regent—had assured
him that he (Carême) was the only one among those who had served his
Highness whose cooking had been at all easy of digestion. Carême
had grasped the essential truth that the richer the cooking is, the
more speedily do the stomach and palate tire of it. And, indeed, it
is a great mistake to suppose that, in order to do good cooking, it
is necessary to be prodigal in one’s use of all things. In reality,
practice dictates fixed and regular quantities, and from these one
cannot diverge without upsetting the hygienic and sapid equilibrium on
which the value of a sauce depends. The requisite quantities of each
ingredient must, of course, be used, but neither more nor less, as
there are objections to either extreme.

Any sauce whatsoever should be smooth, light (without being liquid),
glossy to the eye, and decided in taste. When these conditions are
fulfilled it is always easy to digest even for tired stomachs.

An essential point in the making of sauces is the seasoning, and it
would be impossible for me to lay sufficient stress on the importance
of not indulging in any excess in this respect. It too often happens
that the insipidness of a badly-made sauce is corrected by excessive
seasoning; this is an absolutely deplorable practice.

Seasoning should be so calculated as to be merely a complementary
factor, which, though it must throw the savour of dishes into relief,
may not form a recognisable part of them. If it be excessive, it
modifies and even destroys the taste peculiar to every dish—to the
great detriment of the latter and of the consumer’s health.

It is therefore desirable that each sauce should possess its own
special flavour, well defined, the result of the combined flavours of
all its ingredients.

If, in the making of sauces, one allowed oneself to be guided by those
principles which are the very foundation of good cookery, the general
denunciation of sauces by the medical faculty would be averted; and
this denunciation no sauce deserves if it be carefully prepared,
conformably with the laws prescribed by practice and its resulting
experience.


=The Roux=

The roux being the cohering element of leading sauces, it is necessary
to reveal its preparation and constituents before giving one’s
attention to the latter.

Three kinds of roux are used—namely, brown roux, for brown sauces; pale
roux, for veloutés, or cream sauces; and white roux, for white sauces
and Béchamel.


19—BROWN ROUX

_Quantities for making about One lb._—Eight oz. of clarified butter,
nine oz. of best-quality flour.

_Preparation._—Mix the flour and butter in a very thick stewpan, and
put it on the side of the fire or in a moderate oven. Stir the mixture
repeatedly so that the heat may be evenly distributed throughout the
whole of its volume.

The time allowed for the cooking of brown roux cannot be precisely
determined, as it depends upon the degree of heat employed. The more
intense the latter, the speedier will be the cooking, while the
stirring will of necessity be more rapid. Brown roux is known to be
cooked when it has acquired a fine, light brown colour, and when it
exudes a scent resembling that of the hazel-nut, characteristic of
baked flour.

It is very important that brown roux should not be cooked too rapidly.
As a matter of fact, among the various constituent elements of flour,
the starch alone acts as the cohering principle. This starch is
contained in little cells, which tightly constrain it, but which are
sufficiently porous to permit the percolation of liquid and fatty
substances. Under the influence of moderate heat and the infiltered
butter, the cells burst through the swelling of the starch, and the
latter thereupon completely combines with the butter to form a mass
capable of absorbing six times its own weight of liquid when cooked.

When the cooking takes place with a very high initial heat the starch
gets burned within its shrivelled cells, and swelling is then possible
only in those parts which have been least burned.

The cohering principle is thus destroyed, and double or treble the
quantity of roux becomes necessary in order to obtain the required
consistency. But this excess of roux in the sauce chokes it up without
binding it, and prevents it from despumating or becoming clear. At the
same time, the cellulose and the burnt starch lend a bitterness to the
sauce of which no subsequent treatment can rid it.

From the above it follows that, starch being the only one from among
the different constituents of flour which really effects the coherence
of sauces, there would be considerable advantage in preparing roux
either from a pure form of it, or from substances with kindred
properties, such as fecula, arrow-root, &c. It is only habit that
causes flour to be still used as the cohering element of roux, and,
indeed, the hour is not so far distant when the advantages of the
changes I propose will be better understood—changes which have been
already recommended by Favre in his dictionary.

With a roux well made from the purest starch—in which case the volume
of starch and butter would equal about half that of the flour and
butter of the old method—and with strong and succulent brown stock, a
Spanish sauce or Espagnole may be made in one hour. And this sauce will
be clearer, more brilliant, and better than that of the old processes,
which needed three days at least to despumate.


20—PALE ROUX

The quantities are the same as for brown roux, but cooking must cease
as soon as the colour of the roux begins to change, and before the
appearance of any colouring whatsoever.

The observations I made relative to brown roux, concerning the cohering
element, apply also to pale roux.


21—WHITE ROUX

Same quantities as for brown and pale roux, but the time of cooking is
limited to a few minutes, as it is only needful, in this case, to do
away with the disagreeable taste of raw flour which is typical of those
sauces whose roux has not been sufficiently cooked.


22—BROWN SAUCE OR ESPAGNOLE

_Quantities Required for Four Quarts._—One lb. of brown roux dissolved
in a tall, thick saucepan with six quarts of brown stock or estouffade.
Put the saucepan on an open fire, and stir the sauce with a spatula or
a whisk, and do not leave it until it begins to boil. Then remove the
spatula, and put the saucepan on a corner of the fire, letting it lean
slightly to one side with the help of a wedge, so that boiling may only
take place at one point, and that the inert principles thrown out by
the sauce during despumation may accumulate high up in the saucepan,
whence they can be easily removed as they collect.

It is advisable during despumation to change saucepans twice or even
three times, straining every time, and adding a quart of brown stock
to replace what has evaporated. At length, when the sauce begins to
get lighter, and about two hours before finally straining it, two lbs.
of fresh tomatoes, roughly cut up, should be added, or an equivalent
quantity of tomato purée, and about one lb. of _Mirepoix_, prepared
according to Formula No. 228. The sauce is then reduced so as to
measure four quarts when strained, after which it is poured into a wide
tureen, and must be kept in motion until quite cool lest a skin should
form on its surface.

The time required for the despumation of an Espagnole varies according
to the quality of the stock and roux. We saw above that one hour
sufficed for a concentrated stock and starch roux, in which case the
Mirepoix and the tomato are inserted from the first. But much more time
is required if one is dealing with a roux whose base is flour. In the
latter case six hours should be allowed, provided one have excellent
stock and well-made roux. More often than not this work is done in two
stages, thus: after having despumated the Espagnole for six or eight
hours the first day, it is put on the fire the next day with half its
volume of stock, and it is left to despumate a few hours more before it
is finally strained.

Summing up my opinion on this subject, I can only give my colleagues
the following advice, based upon long experience:—

1. Only use strong, clear stock with a decided taste.

2. Be scrupulously careful of the roux, however it may be made. By
following these two rules, a clear, brilliant, and consistent Espagnole
will always be obtained in a fairly short time.


23—HALF GLAZE

This is the Espagnole sauce, having reached the limit of perfection by
final despumation. It is obtained by reducing one quart of Espagnole
and one quart of first-class brown stock until its volume is reduced
to nine-tenths of a quart. It is then strained into a _bain-marie_ of
convenient dimensions, and it is finished, away from the fire, with
one-tenth of a quart of excellent sherry. Cover the _bain-marie_, or
slightly butter the top to avoid the formation of a skin. This sauce is
the base of all the smaller brown sauces.


24—LENTEN ESPAGNOLE

Practical men are not agreed as to the need of Lenten Espagnole. The
ordinary Espagnole being really a neutral sauce in flavour, it is quite
simple to give it the necessary flavour by the addition of the required
quantity of fish _fumet_. It is only, therefore, when one wishes to
conform with the demands of a genuine Lent sauce that a fish Espagnole
is needed. And, certainly in this case, nothing can take its place.

The preparation of this Espagnole does not differ from that of the
ordinary kind, except that the bacon is replaced by mushroom parings in
the Mirepoix, and that the sauce must be despumated for only one hour.

This sauce takes the place of the ordinary Espagnole, for Lenten
preparations, in every case where the latter is generally used, in
Gratins, in the Genevoise sauce, &c.


25—ORDINARY VELOUTÉ SAUCE

_Quantities Required for Four Quarts._—One lb. of pale roux (Formula
20), five quarts of white veal stock (Formula 10).

Dissolve the roux in the cold white veal stock and put the saucepan
containing this mixture on an open fire, stirring the sauce with a
spatula or whisk, so as to avoid its burning at the bottom. Add one oz.
of table-salt, a pinch of nutmeg and white powdered pepper, together
with one-quarter lb. of nice white mushroom parings, if these are
handy. Now boil and move to a corner of the fire to despumate slowly
for one and a half hours, at the same time observing the precautions
advised for ordinary Espagnole (Formula 22). Strain through muslin into
a smaller saucepan, add one pint of white stock, and despumate for
another half hour. Strain it again through a tammy or a sieve into a
wide tureen, and keep moving it with a spatula until it is quite cold.

I am not partial to garnishing Velouté Sauce with carrots, an onion
with a clove stuck into it, and a faggot, as many do. The stock should
be sufficiently fragrant of itself, without requiring the addition
of anything beyond the usual condiments. The only exception I should
make would be for mushroom parings, even though it is preferable, when
possible, to replace these by mushroom liquor. But this is always
scarce in kitchens where it is used for other purposes; wherefore it
is often imperative to have recourse to parings in its stead. The
latter may not, however, be added to the stock itself, as they would
blacken it; hence I advise their addition to the Velouté during its
preparation.


26—VELOUTÉ DE VOLAILLE

This is identical with ordinary Velouté, except that instead of having
white veal stock for its liquor, it is diluted with white poultry
stock. The mode of procedure and the time allowed for cooking are the
same.


26a—FISH VELOUTÉ

Velouté is the base of various fish sauces whose recipes will be given
in Part II.

Prepare it in precisely the same way as poultry velouté, but instead of
using poultry stock, use very clear fish _fumet_, and let it despumate
for twenty minutes only. (See fish _fumet_ No. 11.)


27—ALLEMANDE SAUCE OR THICKENED VELOUTÉ

Allemande Sauce is not, strictly speaking, a basic sauce. However, it
is so often resorted to in the preparation of other sauces that I think
it necessary to give it after the Veloutés, from which it is derived.

_Quantities Required for One Quart._

  The yolks of 5 eggs.
  1 pint of cold white stock.
  1 quart of Velouté, well despumated.
  ½ the juice of a lemon.
  ¼ pint of mushroom liquor.

_Mode of Procedure._—Put the various ingredients in a thick-bottomed
sauté-pan and mix them carefully. Then put the pan on an open fire, and
stir the sauce with a metal spatula, lest it burn at the bottom. When
the sauce has been reduced to about one quart, add one-third pint of
fresh cream to it, and reduce further for a few minutes. It should then
be passed through a fine strainer into a tureen and kept moving until
quite cold.

Prepared thus, the Allemande Sauce is ready for the preparation of the
smaller sauces. Butter must only be added at the very last moment,
for if it were buttered any earlier it would most surely turn. The
same injunction holds good with this sauce when it is to be served in
its original state; it should then receive a small addition of cream,
and be buttered so that it may attain its required delicacy; but this
addition of butter and cream ought only to be made at the last moment,
and away from the fire. When a sauce thickened with egg yolks has any
fat substance added to it, it cannot be exposed to a higher temperature
than 140 degrees Fahrenheit without risking decomposition.


28—BÉCHAMEL SAUCE

_Quantities Required for Four Quarts._

  1 lb. of white roux.
  4½ quarts of boiling milk.
  ½ lb. of lean veal.
  ⅔ oz. of salt, 1 pinch of mignonette, and grated nutmeg, and 1 small
    sprig of thyme.
  1 minced onion.

_Preparation._—Pour the boiling milk on the roux, which should be
almost cold, and whisk it well so as to avoid lumps. Let it boil, then
cook on the side of the fire. Meanwhile the lean veal should have been
cut into small cubes, and fried with butter in a saucepan, together
with the minced onion. When the veal has stiffened without becoming
coloured, it is added to the Béchamel, together with salt and the other
aromatics. Let the sauce boil slowly for about one hour in all, and
then pass it through a tammy into a tureen; butter the top, lest a
crust should form.

When Béchamel is intended for Lenten preparations, the veal must be
omitted.

There is another way of making the sauce. After having boiled the milk,
the seasoning and aromatics should be added; the saucepan is then
covered and placed on a corner of the stove, so as to ensure a thorough
infusion. The boiling milk must now be poured on to the roux which
has been separately prepared, and the sauce should then cook for one
quarter of an hour only.


29—TOMATO SAUCE

_Quantities Required for Four Quarts._

  5 oz. of salted breast of pork, rather fat.
  6 oz. of carrots cut into cubes.
  6 oz. of onions cut into cubes.
  1 bay leaf and 1 small sprig of thyme.
  5 oz. of flour.
  2 oz. of butter, ½ oz. of salt, 1 oz. of sugar, a pinch of pepper.
  10 lbs. of raw tomatoes or 4 quarts of same, mashed.
  2 quarts of white stock.

_Preparation._—Fry the pork with the butter in a tall, thick-bottomed
saucepan. When the pork is nearly melted, add the carrots, onions, and
aromatics. Cook and stir the vegetables, then add the flour, which
should be allowed to cook until it begins to brown. Now put in the
tomatoes and white stock, mix the whole well, and set to boil on an
open fire. At this point add the seasoning and a crushed clove of
garlic, cover the saucepan, and place in a moderate oven, where it may
cook for one and one-half hours. At the end of this time the sauce
should be passed through a sieve or tammy, and it should boil while
being stirred. Finally, pour it into a tureen, and butter its surface
to avoid the formation of a skin.

_Remarks._—A purée of tomatoes is also used in cookery; it is prepared
in precisely the same fashion, except that the flour is omitted and
only one pint of white stock is added.


30—HOLLANDAISE SAUCE

_Quantities Required for One Quart._—One and one-half lbs. of
butter, the yolks of six eggs, one pinch of mignonette pepper and
one-quarter oz. of salt, three tablespoonfuls of good vinegar.

_Preparation._—Put the salt, the mignonette, the vinegar, and as much
water in a small saucepan, and reduce by three-quarters on the fire.
Move the saucepan to a corner of the fire or into a _bain-marie_,
and add a spoonful of fresh water and the yolks. Work the whole with
a whisk until the yolks thicken and have the consistence of cream.
Then remove the saucepan to a tepid place and gradually pour the
butter on the yolks while briskly stirring the sauce. When the butter
is absorbed, the sauce ought to be thick and firm. It is brought to
the correct consistence with a little water, which also lightens it
slightly, but the addition of water is optional. The sauce is completed
by a drop of lemon juice, and it is rubbed through a tammy.

_Remarks._—The consistence of sauces whose processes are identical
with those of the Hollandaise may be varied at will; for instance, the
number of yolks may be increased if a very thick sauce is desired, and
it may be lessened in the reverse case. Also similar results may be
obtained by cooking the eggs either more or less. As a rule, if a thick
sauce be required, the yolks ought to be well cooked and the sauce
kept almost cold in the making. Experience alone—the fruit of long
practice—can teach the various devices which enable the skilled worker
to obtain different results from the same kind and quality of material.




CHAPTER III


=The Small Compound Sauces=

_Remarks._—In order that the classification of the small sauces should
be clear and methodical, I divide them into three parts.

The first part includes the small brown sauces; the second deals
with the small white sauces and those suited to this part of the
classification; while the third is concerned with the English sauces.


=The Small Brown Sauces=


31—SAUCE BIGARRADE

This sauce is principally used to accompany braised and poëled
ducklings. In the first case, the duckling’s braising stock, being
thickened, constitutes a sauce. In the second case, the stock is clear,
and the procedure in both cases is as follows:—

1. After having strained the braising sauce, completely remove its
grease, and reduce it until it is very dense. Strain it once more
through muslin, twisting the latter; then, in order to bring the sauce
to its normal consistence, add the juice of six oranges and one lemon
per quart of sauce. Finish with a small piece of lemon and orange
rind cut regularly and finely, Julienne-fashion, and scalded for five
minutes.

2. Strain the poëling stock, for ducklings or wild ducks, through
linen; entirely remove the grease, and add four pieces of caramel sugar
dissolved in one tablespoonful of vinegar per one-half point of stock,
the juice of the oranges and the lemon and the Julienne of rinds, as
for the braised-ducklings sauce indicated above.


32—SAUCE BORDELAISE

Put into a vegetable-pan two oz. of very finely minced shallots,
one-half pint of good red wine, a pinch of mignonette pepper, and
bits of thyme and bay. Reduce the wine by three-quarters, and add
one-half pint of half-glaze. Keep the sauce simmering for half an hour;
despumate it from time to time, and strain it through linen or a sieve.
When dishing it up, finish it with two tablespoonfuls of dissolved
meat glaze, a few drops of lemon-juice, and four oz. of beef-marrow,
cut into slices or cubes and poached in slightly salted boiling water.
This sauce may be buttered to the extent of about three oz. per pint,
which makes it smoother, but less clear. It is especially suitable for
grilled butcher’s meat.


33—CHASSEUR SAUCE (Escoffier’s Method)

Peel and mince six medium-sized mushrooms. Heat one-half oz. of butter
and as much olive oil in a vegetable-pan; put in the mushrooms, and
fry the latter quickly until they are slightly browned. Now add a
coffeespoonful of minced shallots, and immediately remove half the
butter; pour one-half pint of white wine and one glass of liqueur
brandy into the stewpan; reduce this liquid to half, and finish the
sauce with: one-half pint of half-glaze, one-quarter pint of tomato
sauce, and one tablespoonful of meat-glaze. Set to boil for five
minutes more, and complete with a teaspoonful of chopped parsley.


34—BROWN CHAUD-FROID SAUCE

Put one quart of half-glaze into a sauté-pan with one-fifth pint of
truffle essence. Put the pan on an open fire, and reduce its contents;
while making same add to the sauce, in small quantities at a time, one
and one-half pints of jelly.

The degree of reduction in this sauce is a good third, but, to be quite
certain, a test of its consistence may be made by allowing it to
cool a little. After the reduction, carefully taste, and rectify the
seasoning if necessary; mix a little Madeira or Port with the sauce,
away from the fire, and strain through muslin or, preferably, through a
Venetian-hair sieve. Stir the sauce now and then while it cools, until
it is sufficiently liquid, and at the same time consistent enough,
to coat immersed solids evenly with a film of sauce. Its use will be
explained among the formulæ of the different kinds of Chaud-froids.


35—VARIETIES OF THE CHAUD-FROID SAUCE

_For Ducks._—Prepare the sauce as above, adding to it (for the
prescribed quantity) one-half pint of duck _fumet_ obtained from the
carcases and remains of roast duckling, and finish it, away from the
fire, with the juice of four oranges and a heaped tablespoonful of
orange rind, cut finely, Julienne-fashion, and scalded for five minutes.

_For Feathered Game._—Treat the Chaud-Froid sauce as indicated in
No. 34, adding one-half pint of the _fumet_ of the game constituting
the dish in order to lend it that game’s characteristic taste. Observe
the same precaution for the cooling.

_For Fish._—Proceed as in No. 34, but (1) substitute the Espagnole
of fish for the half glaze; (2) intensify the first Espagnole with
one-half pint of very clear fish essence; (3) use Lenten jelly instead
of meat jelly.

_Remarks upon the Use of Chaud-Froid Sauces._—The chaud-froid sauce
may be prepared beforehand, and when it is wanted it need only be
gently melted without heating it too much. It ought simply to be made
sufficiently liquid to give a good coating to substances immersed in it.


36—DEVILLED SAUCE

Put in a vegetable pan two oz. of sliced shallots and one-third pint
of white wine. Reduce the latter to two-thirds, add one-half pint of
half-glaze, reduce to two-thirds, season strongly with cayenne pepper,
and strain through muslin. This sauce may be served with grilled fowls
or pigeons. It also forms an excellent accompaniment to re-dished meat
which needs a spicy sauce.


37—“ESCOFFIER” DEVILLED SAUCE

This sauce, which may be bought ready-made, is admirably fitted to
accompany grilled fish and grills in general. In order to make it
ready, all that is needed is to add its own volume of fresh butter
to it, the latter being previously well softened so as to ensure its
perfect mixture with the sauce.


38—GENEVOISE SAUCE

Heat two oz. of butter in a stewpan; insert one lb. of Mirepoix
(No. 228) without bacon. Slightly brown, add two lbs. of head of salmon
and remains or bones of fish, and stew with lid on for twenty minutes.
Let the stewpan lean slightly to one side, so that the butter may be
drained; moisten with one bottle of excellent red wine; reduce the
latter by half; add one pint of Lenten Espagnole, and allow to cook
gently for half an hour.

Rub the sauce through a sieve, pressing it so as to extract all the
essence. Let it rest awhile; carefully remove the fat which has risen
to the surface, and add one liqueur-glass of burnt brandy, one-half
pint of red wine, and as much fish _fumet_. Boil again, then move
stewpan to the side of fire to despumate for one and one-half hours.
Frequently remove what the ebullition causes to rise to the surface,
this second period of cooking being only to ensure the purification
of the sauce. If the ebullition has been well effected, the sauce
should reach the proper degree of reduction and despumation at the same
moment of time. It is then strained through muslin or tammy, and it is
finished at the last minute with a few drops of anchovy essence and
four oz. of butter per quart of sauce.

N.B.—The Genevoise Sauce, like all red-wine sauces, may be served
without being buttered. It is thus clearer and more sightly in colour,
but the addition of butter in small quantities makes it mellower and
more palatable.


38a—REMARKS ON RED-WINE SAUCES

In the general repertory of cooking we also have, in the way of
red-wine sauces, the “Bourguignonne,” “Matelote,” and “Red-Wine”
sauces, which are closely allied to the “Genevoise,” and only differ
from it in details of procedure.

The “Bourguignonne” Sauce is composed of red-wine accompanied by
aromatics, and reduced by half. In accordance with ordinary principles,
it is thickened by means of three oz. of manied butter per quart of
reduced wine. This sauce is buttered with four oz. of butter per quart,
and is especially regarded as a domestic preparation for poached,
moulded, and hard-boiled eggs.

“Matelote” Sauce is made from Court-bouillon, with red wine which has
been used for cooking fish. This Court-bouillon, with the mushroom
parings added, is reduced by two-thirds, and is thickened with one
pint of Lenten Espagnole per pint of the reduced Court-bouillon.

This sauce should be reduced by a third, strained through a tammy, and
finished by means of two oz. of butter and a little cayenne per pint of
sauce.

The Red-Wine Sauce resembles the two preceding ones in so far as it
contains mirepoix browned in butter and diluted with red wine. The wine
is reduced by half, thickened by a pint of Lenten Espagnole per pint of
the reduction, and the sauce is despumated for about twenty minutes. It
is strained through a tammy, and finished, when ready, by a few drops
of anchovy essence, a little cayenne, and two oz. of butter per pint of
sauce.


39—GRAND-VENEUR SAUCE

Take one pint of Poivrade Sauce (No. 49) and boil it, adding one pint
of game stock to keep it light; reduce the sauce by a good third;
remove it from the fire, and add four tablespoonfuls of red-currant
jelly. When the latter is well dissolved, complete the sauce by
one-quarter pint of cream per pint of sauce.