compiled after the translation was completed; and, therefore, in
any differences which may be found between the identifications at the
foot of the page and those given in the Index, the reader will rather
prefer the latter, as the result of later research in works which were
not accessible when the translation was made.

April 30, 1862.                                   R. C.




ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS.


BOOK I.--The work commences with a general review of the animal
kingdom, and several suggestions for a natural arrangement of animals
in groups, according to their external form or their mode of life, a
comparison of animals among themselves, and a description of some of
their habits. Aristotle then introduces the human form, the best known
to man, as the standard of comparison to which he refers the rest of
the animal kingdom. The concluding chapters of this book are occupied
with a description of the several parts of the human body, both
internal and external.

BOOK II.--In the second book the different parts of animals are
described. The animals are arranged in various groups, viviparous and
oviparous quadrupeds, fish, serpents, birds. The only animals described
are those with red blood: the description of the rest being reserved
for the fourth book. Their internal organs are also described; and
in the course of the book a few animals, as the ape, elephant, and
chameleon, are especially noticed.

BOOK III.--The third book commences with a description of the internal
organs, beginning with the generative system. A considerable portion
of the book is devoted to the course of the veins; and Aristotle
quotes from other writers, as well as states the result of his own
observations. He then describes the nature of other constituent parts
of the body, sinews, fibres, bone, marrow, cartilage, nails, hoofs,
claws, horns, and beaks of birds, hair, scales, membranes, flesh, fat,
blood, marrow, milk, and the spermatic fluid.

BOOK IV.--Animals without blood, and first, the cephalopods, are
described; then the crustaceans, testacea, echinidæ, ascidians,
actiniæ, hermit crabs, insects. In the eighth chapter the organs of
sense are considered, and afterwards, the voice, sleep, age, and
differences of the sexes in animals are described.

BOOK V.--In the former books animals are for the most part described
with reference to their several parts. In the fifth book they
are treated as entire, and especially with regard to their mode
of reproduction. First of all, our author treats of spontaneous
reproduction, and then of those animals which spring from a union of
the sexes; and from this he proceeds to some detail with respect to
different groups of animals, testacea, crustacea, insects. The book
concludes with a long description of bees and their habits.

BOOK VI.--In this book the same subject is continued through the
several classes of birds, fish, and quadrupeds. This account of the
reproduction of animals includes also the consideration of the seasons,
climates, and ages of animals, and how far these influence their
reproduction.

BOOK VII.--The seventh book is almost entirely devoted to the
consideration of the reproduction of man, and an account of man from
his birth to his death. This book ends abruptly, and is probably
imperfect.

BOOK VIII.--In the eighth book Aristotle passes on to the most
interesting part of his work, the character and habits of the whole
animal world, as it was known to him. The amount of detail which he has
collected and arranged on this subject is most interesting. He treats,
first of all, of the food of animals, of their migrations, their health
and diseases, and the influence of climate upon them.

BOOK IX.--The subject of the eighth book is continued, with an account
of the relations in which animals stand to each other, and especially
the friendship and hostility of different species; and these are for
the most part referred to the nature of their food, and their mode
of procuring it. The notices of fish are not so numerous as those of
other groups: this would necessarily arise from the difficulty of
observation. At the conclusion of the book, an essay on bees and their
congeners is given at considerable length.

BOOK X.--This book, in all probability erroneously ascribed to
Aristotle, is occupied with a treatise on the causes of barrenness
in the human species. It appears to be rather a continuation of the
seventh book, which ends abruptly; but it is well placed at the end, as
no genuine work of our author.




THE HISTORY OF ANIMALS.




BOOK THE FIRST.


CHAPTER I.

1. Some parts of animals are simple, and these can be divided into like
parts, as flesh into pieces of flesh; others are compound, and cannot
be divided into like parts, as the hand cannot be divided into hands,
nor the face into faces. Of these some are not only called parts, but
members, such as those which, though entire in themselves, are made up
of other parts, as the head and the leg, the hand and the entire arm,
or the trunk; for these parts are both entire in themselves, and made
up of other parts.

2. All the compound parts also are made up of simple parts, the hand,
for example, of flesh, and sinew, and bone. Some animals have all these
parts the same, in others they are different from each other. Some of
the parts are the same in form, as the nose and eye of one man is the
same as the nose and eye of another man, and flesh is the same with
flesh, and bone with bone. In like manner we may compare the parts of
the horse, and of other animals, those parts, that is, which are the
same in species, for the whole bears the same relation to the whole as
the parts do to each other. And in animals belonging to the same class,
the parts are the same, only they differ in excess or defect. By class,
I mean such as bird or fish, for all these differ if either compared
with their own class or with another, and there are many forms of birds
and fishes.

3. Nearly all their parts differ in them according to the opposition
of their external qualities, such as colour or shape, in that some are
more, others are less affected, or sometimes in number more or less,
or in size greater and smaller, or in any quality which can be included
in excess or defect. For some animals have a soft skin, in others the
skin is shelly; some have a long bill, as cranes, others a short one;
some have many feathers, others very few; some also have parts which
are wanting in others, for some species have spurs, others have none;
some have a crest, others have not. But, so to say, their principal
parts and those which form the bulk of their body, are either the same,
or vary only in their opposites, and in excess and defect.

4. By excess and defect I mean the greater and the less. But some
animals agree with each other in their parts neither in form, nor in
excess and defect, but have only an analogous likeness, such as a bone
bears to a spine, a nail to a hoof, a hand to a crab's claw, the scale
of a fish to the feather of a bird, for that which is a feather in
the birds is a scale in the fish. With regard then to the parts which
each class of animal possesses, they agree and differ in this manner,
and also in the position of the parts. For many animals have the same
parts, but not in the same position, as the mammæ which are either
pectoral or abdominal. But of the simple parts some are soft and moist,
others hard and dry.

5. The soft parts are either entirely so, or so long as they are in a
natural condition, as blood, serum, fat, tallow, marrow, semen, gall,
milk (in those animals which give milk), flesh, and other analogous
parts of the body. In another manner also the excretions of the body
belong to this class, as phlegm, and the excrements of the abdomen and
bladder; the hard and dry parts are sinew, skin, vein, hair, bone,
cartilage, nail, horn, for that part bears the same name, and on
the whole is called horn, and the other parts of the body which are
analogous to these.

6. Animals also differ in their manner of life, in their actions and
dispositions, and in their parts. We will first of all speak generally
of these differences, and afterwards consider each species separately.
The following are the points in which they vary in manner of life, in
their actions and dispositions. Some animals are aquatic, others live
on the land; and the aquatic may again be divided into two classes, for
some entirely exist and procure their food in the water, and take in
and give out water, and cannot live without it; this is the nature of
most fishes. But there are others which, though they live and feed in
the water, do not take in water but air, and produce their young out of
the water. Many of these animals are furnished with feet, as the otter
and the latax[1] and the crocodile, or with wings, as the seagull and
diver, and others are without feet, as the water-serpent. Some procure
their food from the water, and cannot live out of the water, but
neither inhale air nor water, as the acalephe[2] and the oyster.

[1] Beaver, Castor fiber.

[2] Medusa, or perhaps Actinia, or both.

7. Different aquatic animals are found in the sea, in rivers, in lakes,
and in marshes, as the frog and newt, and of marine animals some are
pelagic, some littoral, and some saxatile. Some land animals take in
and give out air, and this is called inhaling and exhaling; such are
man, and all other land animals which are furnished with lungs; some,
however, which procure their food from the earth, do not inhale air, as
the wasp, the bee, and all other insects.[3] By insects I mean those
animals which have divisions in their bodies, whether in the lower part
only, or both in the upper and lower. Many land animals, as I have
already observed, procure their food from the water, but there are no
aquatic or marine animals which find their food on land. There are some
animals which at first inhabit the water, but afterwards change into a
different form, and live out of the water; this happens to the gnat in
the rivers, and ...[4] which afterwards becomes an œstrum.[5]

[3] Under the class ἔντομα are probably included all annulose animals.

[4] Some words appear to be lost in this place.

[5] Tabanus, gad-fly.

8. Again, there are some creatures which are stationary, while others
are locomotive; the fixed animals are aquatic, but this is not the
case with any of the inhabitants of the land. Many aquatic animals
also grow upon each other; this is the case with several genera of
shell-fish: the sponge also exhibits some signs of sensation, for they
say that it is drawn up with some difficulty, unless the attempt to
remove it is made stealthily. Other animals also there are which are
alternately fixed together or free, this is the case with a certain
kind of acalephe; some of these become separated during the night, and
emigrate. Many animals are separate from each other, but incapable of
voluntary movement, as oysters, and the animal called holothuria.[6]
Some aquatic animals are swimmers, as fish, and the mollusca,[7] and
the malacostraca, as the crabs. Others creep on the bottom, as the
crab, for this, though an aquatic animal, naturally creeps.

[6] Perhaps some species of Zoophyte.

[7] Cephalopods.

9. Of land animals some are furnished with wings, as birds and bees,
and these differ in other respects from each other; others have feet,
and of this class some species walk, others crawl, and others creep
in the mud. There is no animal which has only wings as fish have only
fins, for those animals whose wings are formed by an expansion of the
skin can walk, and the bat has feet, the seal has imperfect feet. Among
birds there are some with very imperfect feet, which are therefore
called apodes; they are, however, provided with very strong wings, and
almost all birds that are similar to this one have strong wings and
imperfect feet, as the swallow and drepanis;[8] for all this class of
birds is alike both in habits and in the structure of their wings, and
their whole appearance is very similar. The apos[9] is seen at all
times of the year, but the drepanis can only be taken in rainy weather
during the summer, and on the whole is a rare bird.

[8] Perhaps Sand martin.

[9] Swift.

10. Many animals, however, can both walk and swim. The following are
the differences exhibited by animals in their habits and their actions.
Some of them are gregarious, and others solitary, both in the classes
which are furnished with feet, and those which have wings, or fins.
Some partake of both characters, and of those that are gregarious, as
well as those that are solitary, some unite in societies and some are
scattered. Gregarious birds are such as the pigeon, stork, swan, but no
bird with hooked claws is gregarious. Among swimming animals some fish
are gregarious, as the dromas,[10] tunny, pelamis,[11] amia.[12]

[10] Some migratory fish.

[11] A kind of tunny, still called palamyde at Marseilles.

[12] A kind of tunny, Les Bonitons (Camus.)

11. But man partakes of both qualities. Those which have a common
employment are called social, but that is not the case with all
gregarious animals. Man, and the bee, the wasp, and the ant, and the
stork belong to this class. Some of these obey a leader, others are
anarchical; the stork and the bee are of the former class, the ant and
many others belong to the latter. Some animals, both in the gregarious
and solitary class, are limited to one locality, others are migratory.
There are also carnivorous animals, herbivorous, omnivorous, and
others which eat peculiar food, as the bee and the spider; the former
eats only honey and a few other sweet things, while spiders prey upon
flies and there are other animals which feed entirely on fish. Some
animals hunt for their food, and some make a store, which others do
not. There are also animals which make habitations for themselves, and
others which do not. The mole, the mouse, the ant, and the bee, make
habitations, but many kinds both of insects and quadrupeds make no
dwelling.

12. With regard to situation, some are troglodite, as lizards and
serpents, others, as the horse and dog, live upon the surface of the
earth. Some kinds of animals burrow in the ground, others do not; some
animals are nocturnal, as the owl and the bat, others use the hours of
daylight. There are tame animals and wild animals. Man and the mule
are always tame, the leopard and the wolf are invariably wild, and
others, as the elephant, are easily tamed. We may, however, view them
in another way, for all the genera that have been tamed are found wild
also, as horses, oxen, swine, sheep, goats, and dogs.

13. Some animals utter a loud cry, some are silent, and others have a
voice, which in some cases may be expressed by a word, in others it
cannot. There are also noisy animals and silent animals, musical and
unmusical kinds, but they are mostly noisy about the breeding season.
Some, as the dove, frequent fields, others, as the hoopoe, live on
the mountains; some attach themselves to man, as the pigeon. Some are
lascivious, as the partridge and domestic fowl, and others are chaste,
as the raven, which rarely cohabits.

14. Again, there are classes of animals furnished with weapons of
offence, others with weapons of defence; in the former I include those
which are capable of inflicting an injury, or of defending themselves
when they are attacked; in the latter those which are provided with
some natural protection against injury.

15. Animals also exhibit many differences of disposition. Some are
gentle, peaceful, and not violent, as the ox. Some are violent,
passionate, and intractable, as the wild boar. Some are prudent and
fearful, as the stag and the hare. Serpents are illiberal and crafty.
Others, as the lion, are liberal, noble, and generous. Others are
brave, wild, and crafty, like the wolf. For there is this difference
between the generous and the brave--the former means that which comes
of a noble race, the latter that which does not easily depart from its
own nature.

16. Some animals are cunning and evil-disposed, as the fox; others, as
the dog, are fierce, friendly, and fawning. Some are gentle and easily
tamed, as the elephant; some are susceptible of shame, and watchful, as
the goose. Some are jealous, and fond of ornament, as the peacock. But
man is the only animal capable of reasoning, though many others possess
the faculty of memory and instruction in common with him. No other
animal but man has the power of recollection. In another place we will
treat more accurately of the disposition and manner of life in each
class.


CHAPTER II.

1. All animals possess in common those parts by which they take in
food, and into which they receive it. But these parts agree or differ
in the same way as all the other parts of bodies, that is, either in
shape or size, or proportion or position; and besides these, almost
all animals possess many other parts in common, such as those by which
they reject their excrements, (and the part by which they take their
food,)[13] though this does not exist in all. The part by which the
food is taken in is called the mouth, that which receives the food from
the mouth is called the stomach. The part by which they reject the
excrement has many names.

[13] The words in brackets should probably be excluded from the text.

2. The excrement being of two kinds, the animals which possess
receptacles for the fluid excrement have also receptacles for the dry;
but those which have the latter are not always furnished with the
former. Wherefore all animals which have a bladder have a belly also,
but not all that have a belly have a bladder; for the part appropriated
to the reception of the liquid excrement is called the bladder, and
that for the reception of the dry is called the belly.

3. Many animals possess both these parts, and that also by which the
semen is emitted. Among animals that have the power of generation,
some emit the semen into themselves, and some inject it into others.
The former are called female, the latter male. In some animals there
is neither male nor female, and there is a diversity in the form of
the parts appropriated to this office. For some animals have a uterus,
others have only something analogous to the uterus. These are the most
essential organs; some of which exist in all animals, others in the
majority only.


CHAPTER III.

1. There is only one sense, that of touch, which is common to all
animals; so that no exact name can be given to the part in which this
sense resides, for in some animals it is the same, in others only
analogous.

2. Every living creature is furnished with moisture, and must die, if
deprived of this moisture either in the course of nature or by force.
But in what part of the body this moisture resides is another question.
In some animals it is found in the blood and veins, in others the
situation is only analogous, but these are imperfect, as fibres and
serum.[14] The sense of touch resides in the simple parts, as in the
flesh and in similar places, and generally in those parts which contain
blood, at least in those animals which have blood; in others it resides
in the analogous parts, but in all animals in the simple parts.

[14] Fibres and serum, as compared with veins and blood, refer to the
circulation in animals without red blood.

3. The capacity of action resides in the compound parts, as the
preparation of food in the mouth, and the power of locomotion in
the feet or wings, or the analogous parts. Again, some animals are
sanguineous, as man, the horse, and all perfect animals, whether
apodous, bipeds, or quadrupeds; and some animals are without blood,
as the bee and the wasp, and such marine animals as the sepia and the
carabus,[15] and all animals with more than four legs.

[15] Palinurus, Spiny Lobster.


CHAPTER IV.

1. There are also viviparous, oviparous, and vermiparous animals. The
viviparous, are such as man, and the horse, the seal, and others which
have hair, and among marine animals the cetacea, as the dolphin and
those which are called selache.[16] Some of these are furnished with a
blow-hole, but have no gills, as the dolphin and the whale. The dolphin
has its blow-hole on the back, the whale in its forehead; others have
open gills, as the selache, the galeus,[17] and the batus.[18] That
is called the egg of the perfect fœtus, from which the future animal
is produced, from a part at first, while the remainder serves for its
food. The worm is that from the whole of which the future animal is
produced, and the fœtus afterwards acquires parts and increases in size.

[16] Cartilaginous fishes.

[17] Squalus galeus.

[18] Raia batos.

2. Some viviparous animals are internally oviparous, as the selache;
others are internally viviparous, as mankind and the horse. In
different animals the fœtus assumes a different form, when first
brought into the world, and is either a living creature, an egg, or
a worm. The eggs of some animals, as birds, are hard-shelled, and
are of two colours. Those of the selache and some other animals are
soft-skinned, and have only one colour. Some species of the vermiform
fœtus are capable of motion, others are not. But in another place, when
we treat of generation, we will dwell more accurately on these subjects.


CHAPTER V.

1. Some animals have feet, others have none; of the former some have
two feet, as mankind and birds only; others have four, as the lizard
and the dog; others, as the scolopendra and bee, have many feet; but
all have their feet in pairs.

2. And among apodous swimming animals some have fins, as fish; and of
these some have two fins in the upper and two in the lower part of
their bodies, as the chrysophys[19] and labrax;[20] others, which are
very long and smooth, have only two fins, as the eel and conger; others
have none at all, as the lamprey and others, which live in the sea as
serpents do on land, and in like manner swim in moist places; and some
of the genus selache, as those which are flat and have tails, as the
batos and trygon, have no fins; these fish swim by means of their flat
surfaces; but the batrachus[21] has fins, and so have all those fish
which are not very thin in proportion to their width.

[19] Sparus auratus.

[20] Perca labrax.

[21] Lophius piscatorius and also L. barbatus.

3. But the animals which have apparent feet, as the cephalopods, swim
both with their feet and fins, and move quickly upon the hollow parts
of their bodies, as the sepia, teuthis, and polypus: but none of them
can walk except the polypus. Those animals which have hard skins, as
the carabus, swim with their hinder parts, and move very quickly upon
their tail, with the fins which are upon it, and the newt both with its
feet and tail, and (to compare small things with great) it has a tail
like the glanis.[22]

[22] Silurus glanis, L. (Strack).

4. Some winged animals, as the eagle and the hawk, are feathered;
others, as the cockchafer and the bee, membranaceous wings; and others,
as the alopex[23] and the bat, have wings formed of skin. Both the
feathered and leather-winged tribes have blood; but the insects,
which have naked wings, have no blood. Again, the feathered and
leather-winged animals are all either bipeds or apodous, for they say
that there are winged serpents in Ethiopia.[24]

[23] Probably some kind of flying squirrel.

[24] Herodotus, ii. 76; "the form of this serpent is similar to that of
the water-snake; its wings are not feathered, but like those of bats:"
the _draco volans_ may have given rise to this story.

5. The feathered tribe of animals is called birds; the other two
tribes have no exact names. Among winged creatures without blood
some are coleopterous, for they have elytra over their wings, as the
cockchafer and the beetles, and others are without elytra. The animals
of this class have either two or four wings. Those with four wings are
distinguished by their greater size or a caudal sting. The diptera are
either such as are small, or have a sting in their head. The coleoptera
have no sting at all; the diptera have a sting in their head, as the
fly, horse-fly, gad-fly, and gnat.

6. All bloodless animals, except a few marine species of the
cephalopoda, are smaller than those which have blood. These animals
are the largest in warm waters, and more so in the sea than on the
land, and in fresh water. All creatures that are capable of motion are
moved by four or more limbs. Those with blood have four limbs only,
as man has two hands and two feet. Birds have two wings and two feet;
quadrupeds and fishes have four feet or four fins. But those animals
which have two wings or none at all, as the serpent, are nevertheless
moved by four limbs; for the bendings of their body are four in number,
or two when they have two wings.

7. Those bloodless animals which have more than four feet, whether
furnished with feet or wings, always have more than four organs of
locomotion, as the ephemera, which has four feet and four wings; and in
this it not only agrees with its peculiar manner of life, from which
also it derives its name, but also that it is winged and four-footed;
and all creatures, whether they have four feet or many feet, move in
the same direction, for they all move in the long way of their bodies.
All other animals have two leading feet, the crab alone has four.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The following are the principal classes which include other
animals--birds, fishes, cetacea. All these have red blood. There is
another class of animals covered with a shell, and called shell fish,
and an anonymous class of soft-shelled animals (malacostraca), which
includes carabi, carcini, and astaci; and another of mollusca, such as
teuthis, teuthos, and sepia; and another class of annulose animals.
All these are without blood, and the species with feet have many feet.
There are no large classes of other animals; for there are many forms
which are not included under a single form, but either stand alone,
having no specific difference, as man, or have specific differences,
but the classes are anonymous.

2. All animals with four feet and no wings have blood. Some of these
are viviparous, others oviparous. The viviparous are not all covered
with hair, but the oviparous have scales. The scale of a reptile is
similar in situation to the scale of a fish. The class of serpents,
sanguineous land animals, is naturally without feet. Though some have
feet, this class is also covered with scales. All serpents, except the
viper, are oviparous. The viper alone is viviparous, so that not all
viviparous animals have hair; for some fishes also are viviparous. All
animals, however, that have hair are viviparous; for we may consider
the prickles of the hedgehog and porcupine as analogous to the hair of
animals; for they answer the purpose of hair, and not, as in marine
animals that are so covered, of feet.[25]

[25] The Echinidæ.

3. There are also many classes of viviparous quadrupeds, but they have
never received names. Each kind must, therefore, be taken separately,
as man, as we speak of lion, stag, horse, dog, and of others in like
manner. There is, however, one class of those that have a mane called
lophuri,[26] as the horse, ass, mule, ginnus,[27] hinnus, and those
which in Syria are called mules,[28] from their resemblance, though
not quite of the same form. They copulate and produce young from each
other, so that it is necessary to consider well the nature of each of
them separately.

[26] Animals with long hair on their tails.

[27] Ginnus is the offspring of a mule and mare. Book vi. 24, 1.

[28] Hemionus, perhaps the foal of a horse and wild ass, and so
distinct from oreus, the foal of the he-ass and mare.

4. We have now treated of these things in an outline, for the sake of
giving a taste of what we are afterwards to consider, and of how many.
Hereafter we will speak of them more accurately, in order that we may
first of all examine into their points of difference and agreement;
and afterwards we will endeavour to inquire into the causes of these
things, but it will be a more natural arrangement to do so when we
treat of the history of each. For it is evident from these things what
they are, and what we have to demonstrate.

5. Our first subject of consideration must be the parts of which
animals are made up, for these constitute the chief and the whole
difference among them; either because they have them or are without
them, or these parts vary in position or arrangement, or in any of the
differences mentioned before, in form, size, proportion, and difference
of accidents. First of all, then, we will consider the parts of the
human body; for, as every one can best understand the standard of
money with which he is most familiar, so it is in other things. And of
necessity, man must be the best known to us of all animals. The parts
of the body are, indeed, plain enough to every one's common sense; but,
that we may not forsake our arrangement, and may have reason as well as
perception, we will speak, first of all, of the organic, and afterwards
of the simple, parts.


CHAPTER VII.

1. These are the principal parts into which the whole body is divided.
The head, neck, trunk, two arms, and two legs. The whole cavity, from
the neck to the pudenda, is called the trunk. That part of the head
which is covered with hair is called the cranium, the fore part of this
is called the sinciput. This is the last formed, being the last bone
in the body which becomes hard; the hinder part is the occiput, and
between the occiput and sinciput is the crown of the head. The brain is
placed beneath the sinciput, and the occiput is empty;[29] the cranium
is a thin spherical bone covered with a skin without flesh. The skull
has sutures: in women there is but one placed in a circle; men have
generally three joined in one, and a man's skull has been seen without
any sutures at all. The middle and smooth part of the hair is called
the crown of the head; in some persons this is double, for there are
some people double-crowned, not from any formation of the bone, but
only from the division of the hair.

[29] This mistake is again repeated in Ch. xiii.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. The part immediately beneath the cranium is called the face in
mankind alone, for we do not speak of the face of a fish or of an ox;
the part immediately beneath the sinciput and between the eyes is
called the forehead. Those in whom this feature is large are tardy;
those who have a small forehead are easily excited; a broad forehead
belongs to those who are liable to be carried away by their feelings; a
round forehead is a sign of a passionate disposition.

2. Under the forehead are two eyebrows; if they are straight, it is a
mark of a gentle disposition; the eyebrows bent down to the nose are
an evidence of an austere temper; if they incline towards the temples,
of a mocker and scoffer; if they are drawn down, it is a sign of an
envious person. Beneath these are the eyes, which by nature are two in
number: the parts of each eye are, first, the upper and under eyelid,
the edges of which are furnished with hair. Within the eye, the moist
part with which we see is called the pupil; round this is the iris,
and this is surrounded by the white. Two corners of the eye are formed
at the junction of the eyelids, one in the direction of the nose, the
other towards the temple. If these corners are large, they are a sign
of an evil disposition; if those near the nose are fleshy, and have a
swollen appearance, they are an evidence of wickedness.

3. All other classes of animals have eyes, except shell-fish, and some
other imperfect creatures, and all viviparous animals except moles have
eyes. A person might, however, conclude from the following observation,
that it has eyes, though it is quite without them, for it certainly
does not see at all, nor has it any external eyes; but, when the skin
is taken off, there is a place for the eyes, and the iris of the eye is
in the place which it would naturally occupy on the outside, as if they
had been wounded in their birth, and the skin had grown over the place.

4. The white of the eye is generally the same in all animals, but the
iris is very different. In some it is black, in others decidedly grey,
in others dark grey, and in some it is the colour of the goat's eye,
and this is a sign of the best disposition, and is most to be prized
for acuteness of vision. Man is almost the only animal which exhibits a
variety of colouring in the eye; there are, however, some horses with
grey eyes.

5. The eyes of some persons are large, others small, and others of
a moderate size--the last-mentioned are the best. And some eyes are
projecting, some deep-set, and some moderate, and those which are
deep-set have the most acute vision in all animals; the middle position
is a sign of the best disposition. Some people have an eye which is
perpetually opening and closing, others have an eye always intent, and
others a moderately-intent eye: this last is the best disposed; of the
others, the one is impudent, and the other a sign of infirmity.


CHAPTER IX.

1. The part of the head by which we hear, but do not breathe, is the
ear; for Alcmæon is mistaken when he says that goats breathe through
their ears. One part of the ear has not received any name, the other
part is called the lobe. The whole ear is made up of cartilage and
flesh. Internally, the ear has the nature of a shell, and the last bone
is similar to the ear itself. The sound reaches this part last, as it
were in a chamber. There is no passage from the ear into the brain, but
there is to the roof of the mouth; and a vein extends from the brain to
each ear.[30] The eyes also are connected with the brain, and each eye
is placed upon a vein.

[30] Eustachian tube.

2. Man is the only animal with ears that cannot move them. Among
animals which have the faculty of hearing; some have ears, and others,
as winged and scaly creatures, have no ear, but an open orifice in the
head; all viviparous animals, except the seal, and the dolphin, and
other cetacea, have ears; the selache also are viviparous. The seal has
open orifices by which it hears; the dolphin can hear, though it has
no ears; all other animals can move their ears, but man alone does not
move them.

3. The ears (of man) lie in the same circle with his eyes, and not
above them, as in some quadrupeds. The ears are either smooth, hairy,
or moderate. These last are the best for hearing, but they do not in
any way indicate the disposition. They are large, or small or middling,
or they are erect, or not at all, or only moderately erect. The
moderately erect are a sign of the best disposition; large and erect
ears are an evidence of foolish talking and loquacity. The part of the
head between the eye and the ear is called the temple.

4. In the middle of the face is the nose, the passage for the breath,
for through this animals inhale and exhale, and through it also they
sneeze; this is the expulsion of a concentrated breath, and is the
only kind of breathing which is esteemed ominous or sacred: moreover,
inhaling and exhaling is into the chest, and without the nostrils it
is impossible to inhale or exhale, for inhaling and exhaling is from
the breast by the windpipe, and not from any part of the head. But it
is possible to live without this respiration through the nostrils.
The smell also resides in this part; this is the sense of odour. The
nostril is very moveable, and not naturally immoveable like the ear.

5. One part of the nose, namely, the division between the nostrils, is
cartilaginous, but the passage is empty, for the nose is formed of two
divisions. In the elephant, the nostril is very large and strong, and
it answers to the purpose of a hand, for the animal can extend it, and
with it take its food, and convey it to its mouth, whether the food is
moist or dry. This is the only animal that can do so.

6. There are also two jaws, the upper and the under. All animals move
the lower jaw, except the river-crocodile, and this moves the upper jaw
only. Below the nose are two lips, the flesh of which is very moveable.
The mouth is the centre of the jaws and the lips. The upper part is
called the roof of the mouth, the lower, the pharynx. The tongue is the
organ of taste. This sense resides in the tip, and, if food is placed
on the broad part of the tongue, the taste is less acute. The tongue
partakes of all the other sensations, as harshness, heat, and cold, as
well as that of taste, in common with the rest of the flesh.

7. The flat part of the tongue is either narrow or moderate in size,
the moderate is the best, and most apt for clear elocution. The
tongue may be either too loose, or tied down, as in stammerers and
inarticulate speakers. The flesh of the tongue is porous and spongy.
The epiglottis is a portion of the tongue, the double part of the mouth
is the tonsils; that in many divisions the gums, they are fleshy, and
in them are fixed the bony teeth. Within the mouth there is another
part, the uvula, a pillar filled with blood. If this part is swelled
with relaxation, it is called a grape, and chokes.


CHAPTER X.

1. The neck is the part between the head and the trunk; the front
part is called the larynx, behind this is the œsophagus. The voice
and the breath pass through the front part, the trachea, which is
cartilaginous, but the œsophagus is fleshy, and placed farther in, near
the vertebra of the neck. The back of the neck is called the epomis.
These are the parts as far as the thorax. The parts of the thorax are
some before and some behind. First of all, below the neck is the breast
with two mammæ; on these are two nipples, through which the milk of the
female passes. The mamma is porous. There is also milk in the breasts
of men. The flesh of the mamma in men is thick, in women it is spongy
and full of pores.

2. The part below the thorax, in front, is the belly, and of this the
navel is the centre. Beneath this centre, the part on each side is
called the iliac region; the part in the centre, beneath the navel, is
called the hypogastric region; the lowest part of this is called pubes;
above the navel is the epigastric region; the lumbar region is situated
between the epigastric and iliac regions.

3. Of the hinder parts the loin forms the division of the body, whence
also its name is derived (ὀσφύς quasi ἰσοφύς). The part of the central
region which is like a seat is the buttock; that on which the thigh
turns, the cotyledon. The peculiar part of women is the uterus; of men
the penis, it is external, at the extremity of the trunk in two parts;
the upper part is fleshy and smooth, and is called glans; this is
covered with an anonymous skin, which, if it is cut asunder, does not
unite again, neither does the cheek nor the eyelid.

4. Common to this and the glans is the prepuce, the remaining part is
cartilaginous, readily increases in size, and it is drawn in and out,
contrary to that of the class of animals called lophuri. Beneath the
penis are two testicles, surrounded by a skin called the scrotum; the
testicles are not of the same nature as flesh, nor are they made of
flesh. In another place we shall treat of the nature of all these parts
more accurately.

5. The pudendum muliebre is contrary to that of the male, for it is
hollow under the pubes, not projecting like that of the male, and the
urethra is outside the womb, for the passage of the semen of the male,
and for the fluid excrement of both. The part of the body which joins
the neck and the breast is called the jugulum; that which unites the
side, the arm, and the shoulder is the arm-pit. The region between the
thigh and the hypogastric region is called the groin; the part common
to the thigh and the buttock on the inside is the perineum, that of the
thigh and buttock on the outside is called hypoglutis.

6. We have previously treated of the trunk. The hinder part of the
breast is called the back: the parts of the back are two shoulder
blades and the back-bone; below the thorax, and opposite the stomach,
are the loins; the ribs belong both to the back and the front of the
trunk, and are eight on each side, for we have never heard anything
worthy of credit concerning the Ligyes, who are said to have seven ribs.


CHAPTER XI.

1. Man has upper and lower side, the front and the back, and right and
left side. The right and the left are nearly alike in their parts and
in every particular, except that the left side is the weaker; but the
back parts are not like the front; nor the lower parts to the upper,
except in this particular, that the parts below the hypogastric region
are full-fleshed or lean in proportion to the face, and the arms also
answer to the proportion of the legs. Those persons who have a short
humerus have also generally a short thigh: those who have small feet
have also small hands.

2. One of the double parts of the body is the arm. The parts of the arm
are the shoulder, humerus, elbow, cubitus, and the hand; the parts of
the hand are the palm and five fingers; the jointed part of the finger
is the condyle, the unjointed part the phalanx. The thumb has but one
joint, all the rest have two. The bending of the arm and finger is
always inwards. The arm is also bent at the elbow: the inner part of
the hand is called the palm; it is fleshy, and divided by strong lines.
Long-lived persons have one or two lines which extend through the whole
hand; short-lived persons have two lines not extending through the
whole hand. The joint of the hand and arm is the wrist. The outside of
the hand is sinewy, and has not received any name.

3. The other double part of the body is the leg. The double-headed
part of the leg is called the thigh, the moveable part is called the
patella, that which has two bones the tibia; the front of this part
is the shin, the hind part the calf of the leg. The flesh is full of
sinews and veins; in those persons who have large hips, the flesh is
drawn upwards towards the hollow part under the knee, in those who
have not it is drawn down. The lowest part of the shin is the ankle,
and this is double in each leg. The part of the leg with many bones is
called the foot, the hind part of which is the heel. The front part is
divided into five toes; the under part, which is fleshy, is called the
sole of the foot; the upper part, (the instep,) is sinewy, and has not
received any name. One part of the toe is the nail, the other is the
joint; the nail is on the extremity of the toe, and the toes are bent
inwards. Those who have the sole of the foot thick, and not hollow, but
walk upon the whole of the foot, are knavish. The common joint of the
thigh and the leg is the knee.


CHAPTER XII.

1. These parts are possessed in common by the male and female; the
position of the external parts, whether above or below, before or
behind, on the right side or the left, will appear on mere inspection.
It is necessary, however, to enumerate them, for the reasons which I
have mentioned before, that its proper place being assigned to each
part, any difference in their arrangement in man and other animals may
be less likely to escape our notice.

2. In man, the parts of the body are more naturally divided into upper
and lower than in any other animal, for all the upper and lower parts
of his body are arranged according to the order of nature above and
below; in the same way, also, the fore and hind parts, and those on
the right and left, are placed naturally. But in other animals some
of these parts are either not at all so placed, or they are much more
confused than in man. The head is placed above the body in all animals,
but in man alone, as we have said, is this part corresponding to the
order of all things.

3. Next to the head is the neck, then the breast and the back, the
one before and the other behind; and each of them in the following
order:--the stomach, loins, pudenda, haunch, then the thigh and leg,
and, last of all, the foot. The legs have the joint bent forwards, in
which direction also is their manner of walking, and the more moveable
part of the legs as well as the joint is bent forward: the heel is
behind. Each of the ankles is like an ear. From the right and left side
come arms, having the joint bent inwards, so that the flexures both of
the legs and arms are towards each other, especially in man.

4. The senses and the organs of sense, the eyes, nostril, and tongue
are in the same position, and in the anterior part of the body; but
the hearing, and its organ, and the ears are at the side, and upon the
same circumference as the eyes. Man has the eyes closer together, in
proportion to his size, than other animals. The sense of touch is the
most accurate of the human senses, and next to this the taste. In the
rest of his senses he is far surpassed by other animals.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. The external parts of the body are arranged in this manner; and, as
I have said, are for the most part named and known from habit. But the
internal parts are not so well known, and those of the human body are
the least known