HROUGH THE AIR TO 88° NORTH


The day the brothers Wright rose and flew the curtain went up on a new
era in the history of mankind. Many were certain that they could see
great possibilities opening up for mankind in general, and particularly
for them in their own branch of work, but few, I think, saw such
possibilities of making a full and complete change in his work as the
Polar explorer. What he has tried for years to accomplish would now
be possible for him to achieve in a very short space of time. Century
after century had he worked with his primitive means, the dog--the
sledge. Day after day he had exerted himself with all his craft, all
his intelligence, and all his will, yet had only covered a few miles
over the vast ice desert. What courage, what tenacity, had been shown
in the fight against cold, hunger and hardships. What a brilliant
example of sacrifice and self-denial. Year after year shut up in a tiny
little ship, surrounded by the same people, equipped with only the most
necessary things, he had worked up to this time through the greatest of
difficulties, through the hardest tests--cold and darkness. And now,
all at once, in one moment, the whole of this was to be changed. Cold
and darkness should be dispersed becoming warmth and light instead;
for the complete and troublesome journey should be changed now to a
speedy flight. In truth the possibilities were great. No rationing,
no hunger or thirst--only a short flight. As in a dream, seen as a
far-away possibility, there was ignited that day a small spark which
should quickly blaze up to a mighty fire and in the course of a few
years become one of our most important means of communication. Emerging
from its swaddling-clothes, flying freed itself and went into its
cradle when Bleriot flew across the Channel. It was then speedily led
by the world’s war through its childhood where it (developing with
the years--slowly or quickly who can say?) was led into youth--into
manhood! What the possibilities would become it was difficult to say,
but one had to be satisfied with what was there--flying’s childhood.
The young inexperienced birds leaving their nests show us an example.
Some will hurt their wings, others will break them altogether, but, it
is just as certain that, just as they do, so will mankind also succeed
in reaching his goal in the world of flying.

As I learned of Bleriot’s flight, I knew at once that the time
had come to think of using the air to help the Polar expeditions.
Certainly human power and skill had overcome and conquered vast
tracts of this mighty unknown whiteness, but enormous tracts remained
unexplored--tracts which now could be reached from the air. My
thoughts turned especially to the enormous area in the Arctic which
until now had withstood every attempt. Certainly Nansen, the Duke of
the Abruzzi, and Peary had drawn lines through the unknown doing great
and brilliant work, but colossal and unknown tracts still lay in front
of them unexplored. Should we have had to continue exploration in
the same old manner we should have had to wait many years before our
knowledge had become complete. If one _had_ used the word “impossible”
it seems absolutely reasonable to have used it in connection with the
exploration of this immense ice desert; but it seems that the word
“impossible” has been scratched out of the dictionary of mankind. How
often have we seen the impossible made possible! What was impossible
yesterday is an easy matter to-day. Bleriot’s flight across the Channel
showed me the conquering of the impossible. When I, in the year 1909,
equipped the “Fram” for a trip to the Arctic, I had a conference with
one of the most esteemed aviators of the day. He declared himself as
willing to go with me. But it never came off, a fact which probably
was for the best, as in the case of both parties it was put off on
economical grounds. I mention this in order to draw attention to the
fact that the idea of exploring the Polar regions from the air is not
a recent plan. I have been attacked from many sides because I have
“_stolen_” the plans of others; this seems to me childish and scarcely
worth talking about, but many people take childish things for grim
earnest if they have not a closer knowledge of the circumstances.
Therefore, these few words.

In 1914 I managed to get sufficient means to buy my first aeroplane
for use in Arctic exploration. As an independent means of transport
in those vast tracts it certainly could not be used where all
circumstances seemed to be against it, but, in conjunction with a
mother-ship, would be of invaluable service. It was therefore my
intention to take it on board the “Fram,” which at that time was ready
to begin its journey north, and there to use it in the best possible
way. What immense areas would it not be possible to observe in an
Arctic trip if one only was able to rise a few thousand yards? By what
I had seen of the ice I was certain one could always find flat places
to rise from and to land on. But later experience showed me that it
takes an aviator to express an opinion about landing conditions amidst
Polar ice, and not an Arctic explorer. What the second considers to be
a flat plateau can be absolutely useless in the opinion of the first.

My first aeroplane was a Farman biplane mounted on skis. We scarcely
could have got any benefit from this. Later years’ experience shows me
that. The war broke out in the meantime and put a stop to that part of
my program. But then, as so often later in life, I experienced the
fact that an apparent obstacle often had the opposite effect. Flying
technique at that time took enormous steps forward; the child shot up,
grew, and learned to move on its own account.

In 1921 the world’s record for the longest sojourn in the air reached
about twenty-seven hours on a Junker machine in America. It was a
monoplane, built entirely of aluminum, and therefore specially suitable
for working in the Polar regions. Sun, cold, snow, and rain would
not hurt it. I was living at that time in Seattle, Washington, where
“Maud” lay, being equipped for a new journey north. As soon as that
news reached me my decision was made. Such a machine I must have at
all costs. With such an apparatus the impossible would become almost
possible. The door to the Unknown seemed to me to be opening, but my
hopes were dashed and the door remained locked for many years still.
The machine at last was obtained and Lieutenant Omdal appointed to be
its pilot. In May, 1922, we decided, as soon as we had learned to know
the machine, to fly from the works in New York over America to Seattle.
The engine failed as we were over the town of Marion in Pennsylvania,
and we had to make an irritating forced landing in the Oil Fields.
The machine was entirely ruined; a new one was hastily ordered, sent
through America by rail just in time to be taken on board the “Maud.”
Simultaneously the well-known American Curtis Aeroplane Factory put at
our disposal a small reconnoitring machine. Therefore, as the “Maud”
sailed in 1922 she was completely equipped, not only for a trip through
the ice, but also for exploration from the air. The Curtis machine
should be used for reconnoitring and accompany “Maud” all the time. I
promised myself endless results from it. Whilst “Maud” went on right
into the ice and explored sea, ice and air, Omdal and I went ashore
at Wainright on Alaska’s north coast from whence we intended to trek
as far as possible into the unknown territory to the north of that
Coast, but everything went to pieces. On account of the stormy summer
and autumn Omdal and I could not leave the place as arranged, but must
build a house and spend the winter there.

In May, 1923, we were ready for flight, but already on our first trial
flight the Junker broke the whole of its underpart in landing and
became so damaged that all hope of repairing it had to be abandoned.
Thus we gathered no experience. Things went somewhat better however
with the little machine on board the “Maud.” A wireless telegram
announced that it had been twice in the air with Odd Dahl as pilot
and Wisting as observer, but it was crushed in the second landing. So
far as I understand these two flights had not been of long duration;
therefore it was scarcely possible to have studied anything of the
immense area. It is, however, certain that these two were the first
to fly over the actual drift ice. Thus we hear from them, for the
first time, of the great difficulties which flying in this district
presents. It was impossible from the air to determine the condition of
the ice they said; it appeared to be absolutely flat, but it was quite
different as results showed. The prospects now were not any brighter.
On my return to Seattle I had only my two empty hands and a ruined
aeroplane which nobody would have. I did not, however, give up, but
continued to work in order to get a new equipment. Nineteen twenty-four
passed, up till now, without luck. In September of the same year I went
to the Norsk Luftseiladsforeningen (Aero Club of Norway) and proposed
that they should work with me; I was received with open arms. Whilst
they should try to do what they could at home I should travel to
America to see what I could do there. I had already held some lectures
on the subject, and sat one morning in my hotel deeply engrossed in
reckoning out how long it would take me with my earnings to pay my
creditors and start a new flight. The result was not heartening. I
found out that if nothing unforseen happened I should be clear by the
time I was 110 years old! But see, the unexpected _did_ happen just
then. The telephone rang and a voice said, “Are you Captain Amundsen?”
(They always called me Captain Amundsen in America, but as all the
negro conductors receive the same honor it does not make me proud.)
“Yes, I am.” “Well,” continued the voice, “I am Lincoln Ellsworth.”
That was how I became acquainted with the man to whom I should later
owe so very, very much. The Luftseiladsforeningen (The Aero Club)
will certainly agree with me when I say that without his assistance
the expedition could hardly have taken place. It is not my intention
by this to belittle the great and excellent work which the Club did;
in deep thankfulness will I always remember the names of the three
members of the Board with whom I came into direct touch: the president,
Dr. Rolf Thommesen, and the two members, Dr. Ræstad and Major Swerre.
Thanks to their energetic work, together with the State’s kindly aid,
the expedition was soon ready to start. During my stay in America all
the winter, the entire organizing of the work fell on these gentlemen,
but the technical part of the arrangements fell on First Lieutenant of
the Royal Norwegian Navy--Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen.

Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen had already taken part in the spring attempt to
get the expedition going, so he was quite familiar with everything.
It was therefore both with gladness and with trust that I was able to
telegraph to him $85,000--James W. Ellsworth’s gift--begging him to
order the two seaplanes. From this moment Riiser-Larsen got permission
for leave and was able to give himself up entirely to the expedition.
As a flying man he is so well known by every person in the land that
it is superfluous and stupid to mention more. But he has dozens of
other notable qualities which I need not enumerate and which made him
specially qualified to fill his difficult post. With such an assistant
a difficult trip becomes for the leader a pleasant and light effort.

He was assisted in his work by First Naval Lieutenant Leif Dietrichson
and Flight Lieutenant Oskar Omdal. Both these gentlemen had been in the
spring fiasco and thus knew all the details. It is quite unnecessary
to talk about Dietrichson. His skill as a flyer is recognized by all.
His bravery and resolution will stand out clearly later in this record.
With his light outlook on life, his glad smile, and happy nature, he
was an invaluable comrade on the flight. Omdal is known. If things went
_with_ him or _against_ him it was all the same. Nothing seemed to
depress him. He stood beside me in my two unhappy attempts in 1923 and
1924, and you can believe that it took a real man to show courage and
keenness in a third attempt, but Omdal did not disappoint me. “So long
as you don’t give in,” he said to me, “you shall always find me ready.”
He is a marvelous being; he seems to have several limbs more than the
rest of us. He moves slicker and thinks quicker. It is impossible to
depress him. With three such men I knew that the technical part of the
expedition was in the very best hands. The objective of the expedition
was to trek in, as far as possible, over the unknown stretch between
Spitzbergen and the Pole in order to find out what _is_ there, or what
_isn’t_ there. It was not only to substantiate evidence of land, but
to make a geographical research. This substantiation was as equally
important as learning the composition of the land. From Nansen’s, the
Duke of the Abruzzi’s, and Peary’s discoveries we had certainly good
reason to believe that no land existed in that part of the Arctic
Ocean, but our knowledge must be built on _certainties_, not on
_beliefs_. Modern exploration insists on certainties. How miserably
our maps have suffered in this district just on account of “beliefs.”
Land has been put down instead of ocean, ocean instead of land, all on
account of these same “beliefs.” More accidents have been caused by
this than one would think; many people have lost their lives.

Apart from this we hoped to be able to make a number of meteorological
observations which, even although they would not bring us many rich
scientific results, would still give us interesting enlightenment. In
the end we hoped, as at first, to harvest great and rich experiences
which could be, to us and to others, of the greatest help when we once
should be ready to start for the long arranged flight from Spitzbergen
to Alaska. I lay special weight on the fact that I hope our experiences
will be found of use by others. I do not belong to that class of
explorer who believes that the North Pole is a place for himself alone.
My outlook shows that I have an absolutely opposite disposition; “the
more the better,” say I. Rather, let _all_ of us be at the same time at
the same place. Nothing stimulates like competition, nothing encourages
exploration more. How would it appear if, for example, a man made
public his intention to fly across the Polar regions, but for some
unforeseen reasons could not accomplish it? Should every one therefore
stay away from the place so long as the first one was alive? It seems
to me an absurdity which is little in keeping with the sporting spirit
one would expect to reign in these regions. “He who comes first to the
mill gets his grist first milled,” says an old proverb. I hope to be
able to make an attempt to fly from Spitzbergen to Alaska next summer.
I must not, however, declare this to be my private ground, but I wish,
on the contrary, that many will go there too. All the experience which
I have stands at their disposal.

The trend of a wireless telegram from Dr. Sverdrup on the “Maud” in
the summer of 1924 intimated that large tracts of land were not likely
to be found north of Alaska. This theory he has based after careful
tide observations. I have great faith in Sverdrup; I have never met a
cleverer man than he, in his own line, but I feel absolutely certain
that he will agree with me that one should go further in and explore
the place. Without having actually seen it one cannot substantiate the
evidence.

Our hope to get right along to the Pole was very small, for that our
radius of action was too limited. Apart from that I had not any great
interest in reaching the Pole, as I had always regarded Peary as being
the first on the spot. Our objective was only, therefore, to cover
the great distance by flying over it and over the great area we were
exploring.

On the 9th April all the long and many preparations were finished, and
we left Tromsö at five in the morning. The expedition had two ships.
The motor ship “Hobby,” which should bring the two seaplanes up to
Spitzbergen, and the Navy’s transport ship “Fram” which the State had
placed at our disposal for the undertaking. On board the “Hobby” were
Riiser-Larsen, Dietrichson, Omdal, Berge, the photographer, and the
Rolls-Royce mechanic Green.

On board the “Fram”--Captain Hagerup, the second in command Lieut.
Torkeldsen, ice-pilot Ness, Dr. Matheson, Director of the Pisaverkene
Schulte-Frohlinde with two mechanics Feucht and Zinsmayer, the
journalists Ramm and Wharton, the meteorologist Dr. Bjerknes, the guide
Calwagen, also Devold, the cook Olsen, Sailmaker Rönne, Horgen, the
chemist Zapffe, Lincoln Ellsworth and myself. This may appear almost
unbelievable, but that part of the journey was regarded by us as one
of the most anxious. It was still early in the year and the fairway
between Norway and Spitzbergen was anything but safe for two smacks
like ours. The “Fram” is a midsummer boat, intended for an ice-free
sea, sunny and calm. But in the month of April one must not reckon
with these three factors. One would be much cleverer to expect lots of
ice, no sun, and heavy storms, and for that “Fram” is not a suitable
ship. “Hobby” was more of an ice-ship and would in general plow her
way as well as any other, but this was an extraordinary occasion. The
tremendous cases which the flying boats were packed in had no other
place to lie but on deck and in consequence of this “Hobby” became in
very truth not much of a sea ship. The ubiquitous prophet had foretold
her death and her sinking, and I must say that I was almost inclined
to agree with him when I saw the big boxes lifted in the air. After
leaving Tromsö “Hobby” had already given up trying to be a boat; she
looked like a mass of gigantic cases which was wandering along over the
sea.

The arrangements were that both ships should keep together in order
to be of mutual assistance and cheer. It is always comforting in the
loneliness of the sea to be cheered by the near presence of another
ship; assistance too we might both have need of.

It was a dark unpleasant night as we left Tromsö--wet and black. A
foreign film photographer, who accompanied us to Spitzbergen, showed
his spirit by operating his camera under all conditions and filming
for all he was worth. (Had he wished to take a film of a dark night he
must in very truth have been lucky.) Just outside Skaarö Sound we got
into tremendous snow-storms and the meteorologists at the same time
announced that the storm center was in the west. I decided along with
the “Fram’s” captain, Hagerup, that it would be advisable to go into
Skaarö Sound, anchor there and wait. The meteorologists thought that
the bad weather would be of short duration. We signaled to “Hobby”:
“We shall anchor at Skaarö,” after which we steered towards land. We
lost “Hobby” in a snow shower. At 11:45 A.M. we anchored and expected
“Hobby” to arrive soon. Frequent blasts amidst thick snowfalls made the
atmosphere impenetrable. We waited in vain for our comrade.

At four o’clock P.M. the storm center passed and we set off again.
We passed close to Fugleö, peering and glancing into all the creeks
and inlets looking for “Hobby,” but there was nothing to be seen. We
understood, therefore, that she must have mis-read our signal and
steered in a direct course for Björneöen.

In spite of the officers’ and the men’s unchanging kindness and
willingness, the journey was not altogether pleasant. We were packed
as tightly together as it was in any way possible to pack human
beings, and then as the boat began to roll, so the air got thicker and
thicker--I refer to the inside air--and what under normal conditions
would have been perpendicularly hanging things, such as towels, coats,
etc., all stood right out from the wall in such a way that people
began to feel themselves a little uncomfortable--I say uncomfortable,
for nobody would ever be sea-sick! Now I have been at sea for over
thirty years, but I have yet to meet the person who will admit to being
sea-sick. Oh, no, not at all! Sea-sick? Far from it: only a little
uncomfortable in the stomach or the head. In my diary I believe I have
written that there were a number of sea-sick people on board, but I
ask all the people to excuse me if I have been mistaken! I am also so
very frank in my diary that I remark that I, too, am not so sure of
myself, but that remark was presumably only meant for my private eye.
The night of the 10th was particularly unpleasant: Zapffe, Ellsworth
and I lay in the dining-room. Zapffe reclined in a corner of the sofa
looking very pale, but insisting that he had never felt better in his
life. Ellsworth and I lay in our sleeping-bags and, should I judge
from the sounds and movements I heard and saw, I should be bold enough
to say that we were in the same condition of well-being as Zapffe.
Everything that could tear itself free did it, the chairs in particular
appeared to have taken full possession of the dining saloon; the tricks
they performed during the night were absolutely unbelievable. Now and
again they performed alone, now and again they united and performed
in troops. They had also been joined by a box of cigars which fell
down and performed with them, and I can remember how these cigars
flew round our ears. In spite of his paleness Zapffe had not lost his
good-humor. “I thought I was in Havana,” came calm and dry from him as
the first cargo of cigars struck him. I asked him if he would not be
satisfied with Bremen, but that he would not agree to at all. In the
pantry, which lay beside the saloon, there seemed to be a veritable and
forcible jazz band now playing. Which instrument was being used at the
moment was not quite clear to me, but in every case a zinc bucket was
certainly doing its best. The rolling calmed down on the following day
and most of the “souls” showed themselves on deck, with a pale sleepy
look in their faces. I asked one who seemed in a bad way if he had
been sea-sick, but I should never have done that. With cold scorn he
replied that he had never felt such a thing in his life. What he felt
half a minute later when a sudden roll landed him between two boxes and
deprived him of the last part of his breakfast I don’t know. Certainly
not sea-sick!

It is astonishing to notice how people’s interests can change in one
moment. Yesterday we went round Tromsö and not the finest drug store,
or the most tempting grocery shop, or the best set-out shoemaker’s
window would have made us turn our heads to look at them. But this
afternoon one of the members of the expedition had opened a box, which
he had kept standing on the afterdeck, apparently with a view to taking
something out. In a second he was surrounded by a curious crowd. The
object of interest felt himself particularly flattered by so much
notice being taken of him and he took out one thing after another.
First came a tube of tooth paste. All necks were stretched, each one
longer than the other, to get a sight of the wonderful thing. After
that came a tablet of chocolate. What comments this brought forth I
am unable to say as my point of observation was so far away. Certain
is it, however, that the interest in the chocolate was quite intense.
A pair of shoes came next. Had they been new and fine, I could have
understood it. But that anybody could show any interest in these old,
worn, down-trodden shoes is to me unbelievable. A snow storm closed the
entertainment.

Word came that Björneöen was free from ice and we could approach
without fear of meeting any. At four o’clock in the morning of the
11th we passed the island’s most southerly point. We had built on the
possibility of seeing “Hobby” there, but in vain. We sent Björneöen a
wireless and asked them to keep a lookout for “Hobby” and to inform
us immediately if they sighted her. Simultaneously we telegraphed to
King’s Bay and asked them for information regarding the ice conditions
there. Beside the island we ran into a southeasterly wind, which during
the day developed into a fresh breeze. At five o’clock in the afternoon
we came into small ice, but, steering a westerly course, got quickly
clear of it. On the 12th we passed through some fields of mush and
quite small ice. The “Fram” is far from being an ideal ship for ice
navigation, but so well did Captain Hagerup and Ice Pilot Ness guide
us through in such a careful and comfortable manner that they earned
our fullest appreciation. A less worthy man could have sent a boat such
as “Fram” to the bottom in much less ice than we passed through. The
atmosphere was impenetrable during most of the day. At ten o’clock in
the evening--in a little clear glow--land was discernible. It was Quade
Hoock in King’s Bay. At two o’clock we arrived at the edge of the ice
and moored fast to it. The “Knut Skaaluren,” a little steamboat which
had brought the two Directors, Brandal and Knutsen, here, lay there
already.

King’s Bay had been free from ice the whole winter. Only in the last
two days had the ice acquired a temperature of -26°c. We naturally
regarded this as a great misfortune as it seemed that we should be
prevented from getting in to the Coal Company’s quay where we were to
begin the unloading of our boats. So far from being a misfortune this
proved itself later to be our first and greatest piece of luck, that
King’s Bay was icebound.

At ten o’clock in the morning I went ashore in order to pay the
Directors a visit to see what they could do for us. The distance from
where we had moored the “Fram” up to the quayside was a good three
miles; there was a lot of water on the ice, dark and mushy. It was
not easy to see Ny Aalesund, which was snow covered. But the moment
I arrived at the quay and climbed from the ice a hand was stretched
out giving me a warm handshake and a cheery welcome. It was Director
M. Knutsen who, with the Company’s other Director, was to show us the
most glorious hospitality during the whole of our long stay in King’s
Bay. I may as well say it now as later, that without these practical
men’s assistance we could scarcely have brought our arrangements to
completion as they eventually were.

It was soon fixed up that all who were participating in the expedition
should come ashore and stay there where room must be found for them.
“Where there is room in the heart there is room in the house,” they
said. Nothing greater than the “heart room” of Knutsen and Brandal
could any one ever wish to find.

Now there was a matter which weighed on my mind--depressing me in a
high degree. Where was “Hobby”? I went on board the “Fram” at eventide
and walked up and down on the deck. It was about seven o’clock at
eventide when Horgen came up to me and said that he saw something which
stood high above the ice, and according to his opinion only “Hobby”
could present such an appearance. Up with the glasses! Yes!--quite
right, there came a heavy-looking box rustling and crushing through the
ice. “Hobby” itself I could not see even now, but I _could_ see that
there was life on board. Every one ran around and shouted, “‘Hobby’
comes!” “‘Hobby’ comes!” In a second all hands were called on deck and
to the accompaniment of ringing hurrahs “Hobby” lay by the side of the
ice. All was well on board. The first part of the journey was over. Our
boats were safely in King’s Bay. Honor where honor is due and it should
be given to the expedition’s airmen, Captain Holm, Pilot Johannesen and
the whole of “Hobby’s” crew. It was no small act of seamanship which
they had accomplished.

[Illustration: “FRAM” MOORED TO THE ICE AT THE EDGE OF KING’S BAY]

[Illustration: UNLOADING]

The next day was very wintry--sea fog with a temperature -10°. We took
advantage of this for the members of the expedition to flit ashore
and make themselves at home in the Coal Company’s station. The
airmen--Riiser-Larsen, Dietrichson, Horgen, Omdal, in company with
Ellsworth and Ramm--got their cozy little house. Zapffe and I were
quartered in the Directors’ house and the others in the hospital. The
sailing-boat workshop was cleared and prepared as a dining-room. This
was baptized “the salon.” Here the scepter was waved by our steward,
purser, chemist, and purveyor of entertainment. Yes, dear steward,
you won all hearts with your glad, happy spirit. To me you were an
invaluable and priceless aid with your dutiful and conscientious work.

[Illustration: THE GAMES ON MAY 17TH]

[Illustration: THE PLANES WERE PUT TOGETHER NEAR THE COAL COMPANY’S
WORKSHOPS]

The newly frozen ice, which prevented us from approaching the
quay, might have become embarrassing had not Captain Jensen of the
“Skaaluren,” on the 15th April, become tired of waiting and decided
to make an attempt to force it. The attempt was crowned with success
in the highest degree. Never, I believe, had the “Skaaluren” been so
absolutely astonished at herself. She broke through very quickly and
lay a short time afterwards by the quay. “Fram” and “Hobby” followed
behind her in line, and by the evening we all lay alongside the quay.
There we had a northerly breeze of about -13° c.--Mid-winter!

By the following day every one was fully occupied taking our belongings
ashore. Riiser-Larsen organized the work with the frequent assistance
of his comrades and the officers from the “Hobby.” At this point I
would like to hand out a few compliments to the crew of the “Fram.”
When and where they could help, they were always at hand. Quick,
skillful, and willing at all times. Fortunately the ice here was so
strong that one could discharge the seaplanes on to it. This was a
great help and lightened the work considerably. Everybody at the
same time hauled them along a natural slide towards land and placed
them outside the station-workshop, where all the necessary help was
obtainable. Director Schulte-Frohlinde from the Pisa Works, with
his two mechanics, Feucht and Zinsmayer, along with Omdal and the
Rolls-Royce mechanic, Green, who had got the very worst jobs, remained
in charge. In spite of snow and cold they continued “hard at it” from
morning until evening without any one ever hearing them grumble once;
but they were men of steel!

It was gratifying to see how the machines grew from day to day.
Frohlinde believed that he could have them completed by the 2nd of May,
and it very nearly proved so. There was another duty which had to be
carried out each day under the same difficult conditions and with the
same unabated energy. This was the weather report service. No matter
how it blew, no matter how it snowed, nor how bitterly cold it was,
Bjerknes and Calwagen were always “on the go.” Nothing seemed to tire
these two young scientists and the expedition owes them the greatest
gratitude for their splendid work. They were assisted in their work
by Devold, who was principally employed receiving messages from the
numerous stations in Europe, Canada, Alaska, and Siberia. The weather
report service is still in its swaddling clothes, but there is no doubt
that in time it will become a strong factor in our progress. Already we
could see the benefit to be derived from this particular service by any
expedition whether it should go north, south, east or west.

Others of our “most occupied men” were the photographer Berge, and the
journalist Ramm. The first of these two could always be seen with his
camera in his hand and his tripod on his shoulder. He was everywhere.
One could not even blow his nose without Berge being there to
immortalize the event. Ramm kept the world advised of the expedition’s
progress; if we did anything, it was immediately telegraphed. If we did
not do anything, it was likewise immediately telegraphed. His strongest
competitors were the meteorologists; not that they were giving news to
the world’s press in competition with Ramm. No, they did not do that,
but they were in frequent use of the wireless. Between the two parties
there arose a burning question as to which was the more important--the
weather reports or the news reports. The meteorologists voted for the
weather, Ramm for the news. And so it remained. Dr. Matheson acted as
the “Fram’s” and the expedition’s doctor. As a doctor he fortunately
did not get much to do, but it seemed safe and comforting to know that
he was near if anything should happen.

I now come to the expedition’s most occupied man. That was my old
traveling companion from the “Fram” and the “Maud” trips, Sailmaker
Rönne. Since he first joined my service for the “Fram” expedition in
1910--fifteen years ago--any weakening in his work was undiscernible
by me. In view of what he did on this trip one could only come to the
conclusion that he had improved. He was the first man up every single
morning, and in full swing long before any one else. But it was quite
necessary for him to do this if he was to complete in good time all
the little orders which came streaming in to him every day in large
numbers. At one moment he was sewing shoes, soon afterwards trousers,
then tents and sleeping bags. He worked at the boats and made the
sledges ship-shape. His strongest forte was to bring along with him
everything that other people had forgotten. If anything was missing
any one could be absolutely sure that Rönne would be able to help him
out of the difficulty. His greatest service at this time was that
during the flight to the North he gave me a long knife made from an old
bayonet which was to prove our best ice-tool. It was during our last
dinner in the “salon” that he came to me and honored me with the knife.
I had a splendid clasp-knife already, but accepted his gift in order
not to offend him. I intended to lay it away in one or other of my
lockers as it was too big to carry about. But how it happened I cannot
say--the knife appeared in my rucksack and was of invaluable use to us
later. Ton after ton of ice has been shifted by my comrades and myself
with this same knife. When I travel next time I shall have at least a
dozen with me.

Our cook, Einer Olsen, could prepare a rum omelette--now, I must not
let my tongue run away with me--just as well as any chef in the best
hotel of any seaside resort, and that is not saying enough. Apart from
this he absolutely astonished us with what he called “gateau danoise”
(Olsen was a linguist). I sought in vain, from the point of view of a
baker, to analyze this confection, but without success. The nearest I
can describe it is a cross between a cream bun and a “gateau de mille
feuilles.” _He_ got up still earlier in the morning than Rönne and thus
deprived him of his record-breaking honor.

Our stay in King’s Bay began really with the baptism of the “salon.”
That was on Sunday April 19th. The furniture of the “salon” was quite
different from what it originally had been. Its contents were composed
of a long board and four trestles. In addition to this, and on account
of the shortage of room elsewhere, it was necessary for the “salon” to
house the pantry. This stood beside the entrance. A little gramophone
supplied us with all the _jazz_ we desired. In addition to this it
could play music! But what was missing in the way of furniture in
the “salon” was made up for by the culinary masterpieces. And here
competition was strengthened by originality. Yes, there were even a few
who risked saying that.... No, I won’t repeat it, as one says so many
things. On the evening of the christening there were twenty-six people
round the table. I see by my diary that the number was “legion,” but my
diary _has_ to be discreet, so it keeps silent about the rest.

There is nothing particular to relate about the days which followed.
One followed the other just exactly as ordained by the almanac. Some
(yes, the most) were beautifully sunny and beautifully colored from
the magnificent glaciers. Others were overshadowed with fog and snow.
The day in the week which we looked forward to with the most pleasure
was not Sunday, as you might be inclined to believe, but Friday. Every
Friday at 5:30 P.M. there was a steam bath; a proper, really good steam
bath. There was nothing mean about the heat in this as we had coal all
around us, wherever we went, and wherever we stood. It was far meaner
as regards the quantity of water, but we did not bother about that. The
bath was naturally very popular. In the morning the ladies had their
turn; in the afternoon the Directors with their staff along with the
members of the expedition. Saturday was bath day for the miners.

Over and above this a very important piece of work had to be done in
these days: i.e., getting the provisions and equipment ready for the
flight. In case it should interest anybody, I will here repeat my list
exactly as it appeared:


_Provisions_

  Salt Beef        400 gr.  per man per day
  Chocolate        250 gr.        „
  Biscuits         125 gr.        „
  Dried milk       100 gr.        „
  Malted milk      125 gr.        „
    Total         1000 gr.  kg.


_Rucksack_

1 change, diary, compass, matches tinder, housewife, snow glasses,
cup & spoon, pipe & tobacco, linen thread, sail-cloth gloves, 1 pr.
ski-shoes, 1 long knife, 1 pr. skis, 2 staves, 1 pole, 1 sleeping-bag


_Equipment Principally for the Machines_

1 boat, 1 sledge, 1 tent, 1 medicine case, 1 Primus, petroleum,
reserve belts, 1 Meta cooking stove with plates, 2 sextants, 1 level,
navigating equipment, six small and 4 large smoke bombs, 1 cooking
pot, motor spare parts, tools, 2 snow shovels, 1 ice anchor, 1 log, 1
sun compass, 1 pair of glasses, ten plugs, meteorological instruments,
1 shot gun, 1 rifle, 400 cartridges, Colt revolver, 25 shots, senna
grass, benzine pump, hose and bucket, camera, films and plates,
soldering lamp.